Chapter I. Into the Primitive

“Old longings nomadic leap,
Chafing at custom’s chain;
Again from its brumal sleep
Wakens the ferine strain.”

Buck did not read the newspapers, or he would have known that trouble
was brewing, not alone for himself, but for every tide-water dog,
strong of muscle and with warm, long hair, from Puget Sound to San
Diego. Because men, groping in the Arctic darkness, had found a yellow
metal, and because steamship and transportation companies were booming
the find, thousands of men were rushing into the Northland. These men
wanted dogs, and the dogs they wanted were heavy dogs, with strong
muscles by which to toil, and furry coats to protect them from the
frost.

Buck lived at a big house in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley. Judge
Miller’s place, it was called. It stood back from the road, half hidden
among the trees, through which glimpses could be caught of the wide
cool veranda that ran around its four sides. The house was approached
by gravelled driveways which wound about through wide-spreading lawns
and under the interlacing boughs of tall poplars. At the rear things
were on even a more spacious scale than at the front. There were great
stables, where a dozen grooms and boys held forth, rows of vine-clad
servants’ cottages, an endless and orderly array of outhouses, long
grape arbors, green pastures, orchards, and berry patches. Then there
was the pumping plant for the artesian well, and the big cement tank
where Judge Miller’s boys took their morning plunge and kept cool in
the hot afternoon.

And over this great demesne Buck ruled. Here he was born, and here he
had lived the four years of his life. It was true, there were other
dogs, There could not but be other dogs on so vast a place, but they
did not count. They came and went, resided in the populous kennels, or
lived obscurely in the recesses of the house after the fashion of
Toots, the Japanese pug, or Ysabel, the Mexican hairless,—strange
creatures that rarely put nose out of doors or set foot to ground. On
the other hand, there were the fox terriers, a score of them at least,
who yelped fearful promises at Toots and Ysabel looking out of the
windows at them and protected by a legion of housemaids armed with
brooms and mops.

But Buck was neither house-dog nor kennel-dog. The whole realm was his.
He plunged into the swimming tank or went hunting with the Judge’s
sons; he escorted Mollie and Alice, the Judge’s daughters, on long
twilight or early morning rambles; on wintry nights he lay at the
Judge’s feet before the roaring library fire; he carried the Judge’s
grandsons on his back, or rolled them in the grass, and guarded their
footsteps through wild adventures down to the fountain in the stable
yard, and even beyond, where the paddocks were, and the berry patches.
Among the terriers he stalked imperiously, and Toots and Ysabel he
utterly ignored, for he was king,—king over all creeping, crawling,
flying things of Judge Miller’s place, humans included.

His father, Elmo, a huge St. Bernard, had been the Judge’s inseparable
companion, and Buck bid fair to follow in the way of his father. He was
not so large,—he weighed only one hundred and forty pounds,—for his
mother, Shep, had been a Scotch shepherd dog. Nevertheless, one hundred
and forty pounds, to which was added the dignity that comes of good
living and universal respect, enabled him to carry himself in right
royal fashion. During the four years since his puppyhood he had lived
the life of a sated aristocrat; he had a fine pride in himself, was
even a trifle egotistical, as country gentlemen sometimes become
because of their insular situation. But he had saved himself by not
becoming a mere pampered house-dog. Hunting and kindred outdoor
delights had kept down the fat and hardened his muscles; and to him, as
to the cold-tubbing races, the love of water had been a tonic and a
health preserver.

And this was the manner of dog Buck was in the fall of 1897, when the
Klondike strike dragged men from all the world into the frozen North.
But Buck did not read the newspapers, and he did not know that Manuel,
one of the gardener’s helpers, was an undesirable acquaintance. Manuel
had one besetting sin. He loved to play Chinese lottery. Also, in his
gambling, he had one besetting weakness—faith in a system; and this
made his damnation certain. For to play a system requires money, while
the wages of a gardener’s helper do not lap over the needs of a wife
and numerous progeny.

The Judge was at a meeting of the Raisin Growers’ Association, and the
boys were busy organizing an athletic club, on the memorable night of
Manuel’s treachery. No one saw him and Buck go off through the orchard
on what Buck imagined was merely a stroll. And with the exception of a
solitary man, no one saw them arrive at the little flag station known
as College Park. This man talked with Manuel, and money chinked between
them.

“You might wrap up the goods before you deliver ’m,” the stranger said
gruffly, and Manuel doubled a piece of stout rope around Buck’s neck
under the collar.

“Twist it, an’ you’ll choke ’m plentee,” said Manuel, and the stranger
grunted a ready affirmative.

Buck had accepted the rope with quiet dignity. To be sure, it was an
unwonted performance: but he had learned to trust in men he knew, and
to give them credit for a wisdom that outreached his own. But when the
ends of the rope were placed in the stranger’s hands, he growled
menacingly. He had merely intimated his displeasure, in his pride
believing that to intimate was to command. But to his surprise the rope
tightened around his neck, shutting off his breath. In quick rage he
sprang at the man, who met him halfway, grappled him close by the
throat, and with a deft twist threw him over on his back. Then the rope
tightened mercilessly, while Buck struggled in a fury, his tongue
lolling out of his mouth and his great chest panting futilely. Never in
all his life had he been so vilely treated, and never in all his life
had he been so angry. But his strength ebbed, his eyes glazed, and he
knew nothing when the train was flagged and the two men threw him into
the baggage car.

The next he knew, he was dimly aware that his tongue was hurting and
that he was being jolted along in some kind of a conveyance. The hoarse
shriek of a locomotive whistling a crossing told him where he was. He
had travelled too often with the Judge not to know the sensation of
riding in a baggage car. He opened his eyes, and into them came the
unbridled anger of a kidnapped king. The man sprang for his throat, but
Buck was too quick for him. His jaws closed on the hand, nor did they
relax till his senses were choked out of him once more.

“Yep, has fits,” the man said, hiding his mangled hand from the
baggageman, who had been attracted by the sounds of struggle. “I’m
takin’ ’m up for the boss to ’Frisco. A crack dog-doctor there thinks
that he can cure ’m.”

Concerning that night’s ride, the man spoke most eloquently for
himself, in a little shed back of a saloon on the San Francisco water
front.

“All I get is fifty for it,” he grumbled; “an’ I wouldn’t do it over
for a thousand, cold cash.”

His hand was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief, and the right trouser
leg was ripped from knee to ankle.

“How much did the other mug get?” the saloon-keeper demanded.

“A hundred,” was the reply. “Wouldn’t take a sou less, so help me.”

“That makes a hundred and fifty,” the saloon-keeper calculated; “and
he’s worth it, or I’m a squarehead.”

The kidnapper undid the bloody wrappings and looked at his lacerated
hand. “If I don’t get the hydrophoby—”

“It’ll be because you was born to hang,” laughed the saloon-keeper.
“Here, lend me a hand before you pull your freight,” he added.

Dazed, suffering intolerable pain from throat and tongue, with the life
half throttled out of him, Buck attempted to face his tormentors. But
he was thrown down and choked repeatedly, till they succeeded in filing
the heavy brass collar from off his neck. Then the rope was removed,
and he was flung into a cagelike crate.

There he lay for the remainder of the weary night, nursing his wrath
and wounded pride. He could not understand what it all meant. What did
they want with him, these strange men? Why were they keeping him pent
up in this narrow crate? He did not know why, but he felt oppressed by
the vague sense of impending calamity. Several times during the night
he sprang to his feet when the shed door rattled open, expecting to see
the Judge, or the boys at least. But each time it was the bulging face
of the saloon-keeper that peered in at him by the sickly light of a
tallow candle. And each time the joyful bark that trembled in Buck’s
throat was twisted into a savage growl.

But the saloon-keeper let him alone, and in the morning four men
entered and picked up the crate. More tormentors, Buck decided, for
they were evil-looking creatures, ragged and unkempt; and he stormed
and raged at them through the bars. They only laughed and poked sticks
at him, which he promptly assailed with his teeth till he realized that
that was what they wanted. Whereupon he lay down sullenly and allowed
the crate to be lifted into a wagon. Then he, and the crate in which he
was imprisoned, began a passage through many hands. Clerks in the
express office took charge of him; he was carted about in another
wagon; a truck carried him, with an assortment of boxes and parcels,
upon a ferry steamer; he was trucked off the steamer into a great
railway depot, and finally he was deposited in an express car.

For two days and nights this express car was dragged along at the tail
of shrieking locomotives; and for two days and nights Buck neither ate
nor drank. In his anger he had met the first advances of the express
messengers with growls, and they had retaliated by teasing him. When he
flung himself against the bars, quivering and frothing, they laughed at
him and taunted him. They growled and barked like detestable dogs,
mewed, and flapped their arms and crowed. It was all very silly, he
knew; but therefore the more outrage to his dignity, and his anger
waxed and waxed. He did not mind the hunger so much, but the lack of
water caused him severe suffering and fanned his wrath to fever-pitch.
For that matter, high-strung and finely sensitive, the ill treatment
had flung him into a fever, which was fed by the inflammation of his
parched and swollen throat and tongue.

He was glad for one thing: the rope was off his neck. That had given
them an unfair advantage; but now that it was off, he would show them.
They would never get another rope around his neck. Upon that he was
resolved. For two days and nights he neither ate nor drank, and during
those two days and nights of torment, he accumulated a fund of wrath
that boded ill for whoever first fell foul of him. His eyes turned
blood-shot, and he was metamorphosed into a raging fiend. So changed
was he that the Judge himself would not have recognized him; and the
express messengers breathed with relief when they bundled him off the
train at Seattle.

Four men gingerly carried the crate from the wagon into a small,
high-walled back yard. A stout man, with a red sweater that sagged
generously at the neck, came out and signed the book for the driver.
That was the man, Buck divined, the next tormentor, and he hurled
himself savagely against the bars. The man smiled grimly, and brought a
hatchet and a club.

“You ain’t going to take him out now?” the driver asked.

“Sure,” the man replied, driving the hatchet into the crate for a pry.

There was an instantaneous scattering of the four men who had carried
it in, and from safe perches on top the wall they prepared to watch the
performance.

Buck rushed at the splintering wood, sinking his teeth into it, surging
and wrestling with it. Wherever the hatchet fell on the outside, he was
there on the inside, snarling and growling, as furiously anxious to get
out as the man in the red sweater was calmly intent on getting him out.

“Now, you red-eyed devil,” he said, when he had made an opening
sufficient for the passage of Buck’s body. At the same time he dropped
the hatchet and shifted the club to his right hand.

And Buck was truly a red-eyed devil, as he drew himself together for
the spring, hair bristling, mouth foaming, a mad glitter in his
blood-shot eyes. Straight at the man he launched his one hundred and
forty pounds of fury, surcharged with the pent passion of two days and
nights. In mid air, just as his jaws were about to close on the man, he
received a shock that checked his body and brought his teeth together
with an agonizing clip. He whirled over, fetching the ground on his
back and side. He had never been struck by a club in his life, and did
not understand. With a snarl that was part bark and more scream he was
again on his feet and launched into the air. And again the shock came
and he was brought crushingly to the ground. This time he was aware
that it was the club, but his madness knew no caution. A dozen times he
charged, and as often the club broke the charge and smashed him down.

After a particularly fierce blow, he crawled to his feet, too dazed to
rush. He staggered limply about, the blood flowing from nose and mouth
and ears, his beautiful coat sprayed and flecked with bloody slaver.
Then the man advanced and deliberately dealt him a frightful blow on
the nose. All the pain he had endured was as nothing compared with the
exquisite agony of this. With a roar that was almost lionlike in its
ferocity, he again hurled himself at the man. But the man, shifting the
club from right to left, coolly caught him by the under jaw, at the
same time wrenching downward and backward. Buck described a complete
circle in the air, and half of another, then crashed to the ground on
his head and chest.

For the last time he rushed. The man struck the shrewd blow he had
purposely withheld for so long, and Buck crumpled up and went down,
knocked utterly senseless.

“He’s no slouch at dog-breakin’, that’s wot I say,” one of the men on
the wall cried enthusiastically.

“Druther break cayuses any day, and twice on Sundays,” was the reply of
the driver, as he climbed on the wagon and started the horses.

Buck’s senses came back to him, but not his strength. He lay where he
had fallen, and from there he watched the man in the red sweater.

“‘Answers to the name of Buck,’” the man soliloquized, quoting from the
saloon-keeper’s letter which had announced the consignment of the crate
and contents. “Well, Buck, my boy,” he went on in a genial voice,
“we’ve had our little ruction, and the best thing we can do is to let
it go at that. You’ve learned your place, and I know mine. Be a good
dog and all ’ll go well and the goose hang high. Be a bad dog, and I’ll
whale the stuffin’ outa you. Understand?”

As he spoke he fearlessly patted the head he had so mercilessly
pounded, and though Buck’s hair involuntarily bristled at touch of the
hand, he endured it without protest. When the man brought him water he
drank eagerly, and later bolted a generous meal of raw meat, chunk by
chunk, from the man’s hand.

He was beaten (he knew that); but he was not broken. He saw, once for
all, that he stood no chance against a man with a club. He had learned
the lesson, and in all his after life he never forgot it. That club was
a revelation. It was his introduction to the reign of primitive law,
and he met the introduction halfway. The facts of life took on a
fiercer aspect; and while he faced that aspect uncowed, he faced it
with all the latent cunning of his nature aroused. As the days went by,
other dogs came, in crates and at the ends of ropes, some docilely, and
some raging and roaring as he had come; and, one and all, he watched
them pass under the dominion of the man in the red sweater. Again and
again, as he looked at each brutal performance, the lesson was driven
home to Buck: a man with a club was a lawgiver, a master to be obeyed,
though not necessarily conciliated. Of this last Buck was never guilty,
though he did see beaten dogs that fawned upon the man, and wagged
their tails, and licked his hand. Also he saw one dog, that would
neither conciliate nor obey, finally killed in the struggle for
mastery.

Now and again men came, strangers, who talked excitedly, wheedlingly,
and in all kinds of fashions to the man in the red sweater. And at such
times that money passed between them the strangers took one or more of
the dogs away with them. Buck wondered where they went, for they never
came back; but the fear of the future was strong upon him, and he was
glad each time when he was not selected.

Yet his time came, in the end, in the form of a little weazened man who
spat broken English and many strange and uncouth exclamations which
Buck could not understand.

“Sacredam!” he cried, when his eyes lit upon Buck. “Dat one dam bully
dog! Eh? How moch?”

“Three hundred, and a present at that,” was the prompt reply of the man
in the red sweater. “And seem’ it’s government money, you ain’t got no
kick coming, eh, Perrault?”

Perrault grinned. Considering that the price of dogs had been boomed
skyward by the unwonted demand, it was not an unfair sum for so fine an
animal. The Canadian Government would be no loser, nor would its
despatches travel the slower. Perrault knew dogs, and when he looked at
Buck he knew that he was one in a thousand—“One in ten t’ousand,” he
commented mentally.

Buck saw money pass between them, and was not surprised when Curly, a
good-natured Newfoundland, and he were led away by the little weazened
man. That was the last he saw of the man in the red sweater, and as
Curly and he looked at receding Seattle from the deck of the _Narwhal_,
it was the last he saw of the warm Southland. Curly and he were taken
below by Perrault and turned over to a black-faced giant called
François. Perrault was a French-Canadian, and swarthy; but François was
a French-Canadian half-breed, and twice as swarthy. They were a new
kind of men to Buck (of which he was destined to see many more), and
while he developed no affection for them, he none the less grew
honestly to respect them. He speedily learned that Perrault and
François were fair men, calm and impartial in administering justice,
and too wise in the way of dogs to be fooled by dogs.

In the ’tween-decks of the _Narwhal_, Buck and Curly joined two other
dogs. One of them was a big, snow-white fellow from Spitzbergen who had
been brought away by a whaling captain, and who had later accompanied a
Geological Survey into the Barrens. He was friendly, in a treacherous
sort of way, smiling into one’s face the while he meditated some
underhand trick, as, for instance, when he stole from Buck’s food at
the first meal. As Buck sprang to punish him, the lash of François’s
whip sang through the air, reaching the culprit first; and nothing
remained to Buck but to recover the bone. That was fair of François, he
decided, and the half-breed began his rise in Buck’s estimation.

The other dog made no advances, nor received any; also, he did not
attempt to steal from the newcomers. He was a gloomy, morose fellow,
and he showed Curly plainly that all he desired was to be left alone,
and further, that there would be trouble if he were not left alone.
“Dave” he was called, and he ate and slept, or yawned between times,
and took interest in nothing, not even when the _Narwhal_ crossed Queen
Charlotte Sound and rolled and pitched and bucked like a thing
possessed. When Buck and Curly grew excited, half wild with fear, he
raised his head as though annoyed, favored them with an incurious
glance, yawned, and went to sleep again.

Day and night the ship throbbed to the tireless pulse of the propeller,
and though one day was very like another, it was apparent to Buck that
the weather was steadily growing colder. At last, one morning, the
propeller was quiet, and the _Narwhal_ was pervaded with an atmosphere
of excitement. He felt it, as did the other dogs, and knew that a
change was at hand. François leashed them and brought them on deck. At
the first step upon the cold surface, Buck’s feet sank into a white
mushy something very like mud. He sprang back with a snort. More of
this white stuff was falling through the air. He shook himself, but
more of it fell upon him. He sniffed it curiously, then licked some up
on his tongue. It bit like fire, and the next instant was gone. This
puzzled him. He tried it again, with the same result. The onlookers
laughed uproariously, and he felt ashamed, he knew not why, for it was
his first snow.



Chapter II. The Law of Club and Fang

Buck’s first day on the Dyea beach was like a nightmare. Every hour was
filled with shock and surprise. He had been suddenly jerked from the
heart of civilization and flung into the heart of things primordial. No
lazy, sun-kissed life was this, with nothing to do but loaf and be
bored. Here was neither peace, nor rest, nor a moment’s safety. All was
confusion and action, and every moment life and limb were in peril.
There was imperative need to be constantly alert; for these dogs and
men were not town dogs and men. They were savages, all of them, who
knew no law but the law of club and fang.

He had never seen dogs fight as these wolfish creatures fought, and his
first experience taught him an unforgetable lesson. It is true, it was
a vicarious experience, else he would not have lived to profit by it.
Curly was the victim. They were camped near the log store, where she,
in her friendly way, made advances to a husky dog the size of a
full-grown wolf, though not half so large as she. There was no warning,
only a leap in like a flash, a metallic clip of teeth, a leap out
equally swift, and Curly’s face was ripped open from eye to jaw.

It was the wolf manner of fighting, to strike and leap away; but there
was more to it than this. Thirty or forty huskies ran to the spot and
surrounded the combatants in an intent and silent circle. Buck did not
comprehend that silent intentness, nor the eager way with which they
were licking their chops. Curly rushed her antagonist, who struck again
and leaped aside. He met her next rush with his chest, in a peculiar
fashion that tumbled her off her feet. She never regained them, This
was what the onlooking huskies had waited for. They closed in upon her,
snarling and yelping, and she was buried, screaming with agony, beneath
the bristling mass of bodies.

So sudden was it, and so unexpected, that Buck was taken aback. He saw
Spitz run out his scarlet tongue in a way he had of laughing; and he
saw François, swinging an axe, spring into the mess of dogs. Three men
with clubs were helping him to scatter them. It did not take long. Two
minutes from the time Curly went down, the last of her assailants were
clubbed off. But she lay there limp and lifeless in the bloody,
trampled snow, almost literally torn to pieces, the swart half-breed
standing over her and cursing horribly. The scene often came back to
Buck to trouble him in his sleep. So that was the way. No fair play.
Once down, that was the end of you. Well, he would see to it that he
never went down. Spitz ran out his tongue and laughed again, and from
that moment Buck hated him with a bitter and deathless hatred.

Before he had recovered from the shock caused by the tragic passing of
Curly, he received another shock. François fastened upon him an
arrangement of straps and buckles. It was a harness, such as he had
seen the grooms put on the horses at home. And as he had seen horses
work, so he was set to work, hauling François on a sled to the forest
that fringed the valley, and returning with a load of firewood. Though
his dignity was sorely hurt by thus being made a draught animal, he was
too wise to rebel. He buckled down with a will and did his best, though
it was all new and strange. François was stern, demanding instant
obedience, and by virtue of his whip receiving instant obedience; while
Dave, who was an experienced wheeler, nipped Buck’s hind quarters
whenever he was in error. Spitz was the leader, likewise experienced,
and while he could not always get at Buck, he growled sharp reproof now
and again, or cunningly threw his weight in the traces to jerk Buck
into the way he should go. Buck learned easily, and under the combined
tuition of his two mates and François made remarkable progress. Ere
they returned to camp he knew enough to stop at “ho,” to go ahead at
“mush,” to swing wide on the bends, and to keep clear of the wheeler
when the loaded sled shot downhill at their heels.

“T’ree vair’ good dogs,” François told Perrault. “Dat Buck, heem pool
lak hell. I tich heem queek as anyt’ing.”

By afternoon, Perrault, who was in a hurry to be on the trail with his
despatches, returned with two more dogs. “Billee” and “Joe” he called
them, two brothers, and true huskies both. Sons of the one mother
though they were, they were as different as day and night. Billee’s one
fault was his excessive good nature, while Joe was the very opposite,
sour and introspective, with a perpetual snarl and a malignant eye.
Buck received them in comradely fashion, Dave ignored them, while Spitz
proceeded to thrash first one and then the other. Billee wagged his
tail appeasingly, turned to run when he saw that appeasement was of no
avail, and cried (still appeasingly) when Spitz’s sharp teeth scored
his flank. But no matter how Spitz circled, Joe whirled around on his
heels to face him, mane bristling, ears laid back, lips writhing and
snarling, jaws clipping together as fast as he could snap, and eyes
diabolically gleaming—the incarnation of belligerent fear. So terrible
was his appearance that Spitz was forced to forego disciplining him;
but to cover his own discomfiture he turned upon the inoffensive and
wailing Billee and drove him to the confines of the camp.

By evening Perrault secured another dog, an old husky, long and lean
and gaunt, with a battle-scarred face and a single eye which flashed a
warning of prowess that commanded respect. He was called Sol-leks,
which means the Angry One. Like Dave, he asked nothing, gave nothing,
expected nothing; and when he marched slowly and deliberately into
their midst, even Spitz left him alone. He had one peculiarity which
Buck was unlucky enough to discover. He did not like to be approached
on his blind side. Of this offence Buck was unwittingly guilty, and the
first knowledge he had of his indiscretion was when Sol-leks whirled
upon him and slashed his shoulder to the bone for three inches up and
down. Forever after Buck avoided his blind side, and to the last of
their comradeship had no more trouble. His only apparent ambition, like
Dave’s, was to be left alone; though, as Buck was afterward to learn,
each of them possessed one other and even more vital ambition.

That night Buck faced the great problem of sleeping. The tent,
illumined by a candle, glowed warmly in the midst of the white plain;
and when he, as a matter of course, entered it, both Perrault and
François bombarded him with curses and cooking utensils, till he
recovered from his consternation and fled ignominiously into the outer
cold. A chill wind was blowing that nipped him sharply and bit with
especial venom into his wounded shoulder. He lay down on the snow and
attempted to sleep, but the frost soon drove him shivering to his feet.
Miserable and disconsolate, he wandered about among the many tents,
only to find that one place was as cold as another. Here and there
savage dogs rushed upon him, but he bristled his neck-hair and snarled
(for he was learning fast), and they let him go his way unmolested.

Finally an idea came to him. He would return and see how his own
team-mates were making out. To his astonishment, they had disappeared.
Again he wandered about through the great camp, looking for them, and
again he returned. Were they in the tent? No, that could not be, else
he would not have been driven out. Then where could they possibly be?
With drooping tail and shivering body, very forlorn indeed, he
aimlessly circled the tent. Suddenly the snow gave way beneath his fore
legs and he sank down. Something wriggled under his feet. He sprang
back, bristling and snarling, fearful of the unseen and unknown. But a
friendly little yelp reassured him, and he went back to investigate. A
whiff of warm air ascended to his nostrils, and there, curled up under
the snow in a snug ball, lay Billee. He whined placatingly, squirmed
and wriggled to show his good will and intentions, and even ventured,
as a bribe for peace, to lick Buck’s face with his warm wet tongue.

Another lesson. So that was the way they did it, eh? Buck confidently
selected a spot, and with much fuss and waste effort proceeded to dig a
hole for himself. In a trice the heat from his body filled the confined
space and he was asleep. The day had been long and arduous, and he
slept soundly and comfortably, though he growled and barked and
wrestled with bad dreams.

Nor did he open his eyes till roused by the noises of the waking camp.
At first he did not know where he was. It had snowed during the night
and he was completely buried. The snow walls pressed him on every side,
and a great surge of fear swept through him—the fear of the wild thing
for the trap. It was a token that he was harking back through his own
life to the lives of his forebears; for he was a civilized dog, an
unduly civilized dog, and of his own experience knew no trap and so
could not of himself fear it. The muscles of his whole body contracted
spasmodically and instinctively, the hair on his neck and shoulders
stood on end, and with a ferocious snarl he bounded straight up into
the blinding day, the snow flying about him in a flashing cloud. Ere he
landed on his feet, he saw the white camp spread out before him and
knew where he was and remembered all that had passed from the time he
went for a stroll with Manuel to the hole he had dug for himself the
night before.

A shout from François hailed his appearance. “Wot I say?” the
dog-driver cried to Perrault. “Dat Buck for sure learn queek as
anyt’ing.”

Perrault nodded gravely. As courier for the Canadian Government,
bearing important despatches, he was anxious to secure the best dogs,
and he was particularly gladdened by the possession of Buck.

Three more huskies were added to the team inside an hour, making a
total of nine, and before another quarter of an hour had passed they
were in harness and swinging up the trail toward the Dyea Cañon. Buck
was glad to be gone, and though the work was hard he found he did not
particularly despise it. He was surprised at the eagerness which
animated the whole team and which was communicated to him; but still
more surprising was the change wrought in Dave and Sol-leks. They were
new dogs, utterly transformed by the harness. All passiveness and
unconcern had dropped from them. They were alert and active, anxious
that the work should go well, and fiercely irritable with whatever, by
delay or confusion, retarded that work. The toil of the traces seemed
the supreme expression of their being, and all that they lived for and
the only thing in which they took delight.

Dave was wheeler or sled dog, pulling in front of him was Buck, then
came Sol-leks; the rest of the team was strung out ahead, single file,
to the leader, which position was filled by Spitz.

Buck had been purposely placed between Dave and Sol-leks so that he
might receive instruction. Apt scholar that he was, they were equally
apt teachers, never allowing him to linger long in error, and enforcing
their teaching with their sharp teeth. Dave was fair and very wise. He
never nipped Buck without cause, and he never failed to nip him when he
stood in need of it. As François’s whip backed him up, Buck found it to
be cheaper to mend his ways than to retaliate. Once, during a brief
halt, when he got tangled in the traces and delayed the start, both
Dave and Sol-leks flew at him and administered a sound trouncing. The
resulting tangle was even worse, but Buck took good care to keep the
traces clear thereafter; and ere the day was done, so well had he
mastered his work, his mates about ceased nagging him. François’s whip
snapped less frequently, and Perrault even honored Buck by lifting up
his feet and carefully examining them.

It was a hard day’s run, up the Cañon, through Sheep Camp, past the
Scales and the timber line, across glaciers and snowdrifts hundreds of
feet deep, and over the great Chilcoot Divide, which stands between the
salt water and the fresh and guards forbiddingly the sad and lonely
North. They made good time down the chain of lakes which fills the
craters of extinct volcanoes, and late that night pulled into the huge
camp at the head of Lake Bennett, where thousands of goldseekers were
building boats against the break-up of the ice in the spring. Buck made
his hole in the snow and slept the sleep of the exhausted just, but all
too early was routed out in the cold darkness and harnessed with his
mates to the sled.

That day they made forty miles, the trail being packed; but the next
day, and for many days to follow, they broke their own trail, worked
harder, and made poorer time. As a rule, Perrault travelled ahead of
the team, packing the snow with webbed shoes to make it easier for
them. François, guiding the sled at the gee-pole, sometimes exchanged
places with him, but not often. Perrault was in a hurry, and he prided
himself on his knowledge of ice, which knowledge was indispensable, for
the fall ice was very thin, and where there was swift water, there was
no ice at all.

Day after day, for days unending, Buck toiled in the traces. Always,
they broke camp in the dark, and the first gray of dawn found them
hitting the trail with fresh miles reeled off behind them. And always
they pitched camp after dark, eating their bit of fish, and crawling to
sleep into the snow. Buck was ravenous. The pound and a half of
sun-dried salmon, which was his ration for each day, seemed to go
nowhere. He never had enough, and suffered from perpetual hunger pangs.
Yet the other dogs, because they weighed less and were born to the
life, received a pound only of the fish and managed to keep in good
condition.

He swiftly lost the fastidiousness which had characterized his old
life. A dainty eater, he found that his mates, finishing first, robbed
him of his unfinished ration. There was no defending it. While he was
fighting off two or three, it was disappearing down the throats of the
others. To remedy this, he ate as fast as they; and, so greatly did
hunger compel him, he was not above taking what did not belong to him.
He watched and learned. When he saw Pike, one of the new dogs, a clever
malingerer and thief, slyly steal a slice of bacon when Perrault’s back
was turned, he duplicated the performance the following day, getting
away with the whole chunk. A great uproar was raised, but he was
unsuspected; while Dub, an awkward blunderer who was always getting
caught, was punished for Buck’s misdeed.

This first theft marked Buck as fit to survive in the hostile Northland
environment. It marked his adaptability, his capacity to adjust himself
to changing conditions, the lack of which would have meant swift and
terrible death. It marked, further, the decay or going to pieces of his
moral nature, a vain thing and a handicap in the ruthless struggle for
existence. It was all well enough in the Southland, under the law of
love and fellowship, to respect private property and personal feelings;
but in the Northland, under the law of club and fang, whoso took such
things into account was a fool, and in so far as he observed them he
would fail to prosper.

Not that Buck reasoned it out. He was fit, that was all, and
unconsciously he accommodated himself to the new mode of life. All his
days, no matter what the odds, he had never run from a fight. But the
club of the man in the red sweater had beaten into him a more
fundamental and primitive code. Civilized, he could have died for a
moral consideration, say the defence of Judge Miller’s riding-whip; but
the completeness of his decivilization was now evidenced by his ability
to flee from the defence of a moral consideration and so save his hide.
He did not steal for joy of it, but because of the clamor of his
stomach. He did not rob openly, but stole secretly and cunningly, out
of respect for club and fang. In short, the things he did were done
because it was easier to do them than not to do them.

His development (or retrogression) was rapid. His muscles became hard
as iron, and he grew callous to all ordinary pain. He achieved an
internal as well as external economy. He could eat anything, no matter
how loathsome or indigestible; and, once eaten, the juices of his
stomach extracted the last least particle of nutriment; and his blood
carried it to the farthest reaches of his body, building it into the
toughest and stoutest of tissues. Sight and scent became remarkably
keen, while his hearing developed such acuteness that in his sleep he
heard the faintest sound and knew whether it heralded peace or peril.
He learned to bite the ice out with his teeth when it collected between
his toes; and when he was thirsty and there was a thick scum of ice
over the water hole, he would break it by rearing and striking it with
stiff fore legs. His most conspicuous trait was an ability to scent the
wind and forecast it a night in advance. No matter how breathless the
air when he dug his nest by tree or bank, the wind that later blew
inevitably found him to leeward, sheltered and snug.

And not only did he learn by experience, but instincts long dead became
alive again. The domesticated generations fell from him. In vague ways
he remembered back to the youth of the breed, to the time the wild dogs
ranged in packs through the primeval forest and killed their meat as
they ran it down. It was no task for him to learn to fight with cut and
slash and the quick wolf snap. In this manner had fought forgotten
ancestors. They quickened the old life within him, and the old tricks
which they had stamped into the heredity of the breed were his tricks.
They came to him without effort or discovery, as though they had been
his always. And when, on the still cold nights, he pointed his nose at
a star and howled long and wolflike, it was his ancestors, dead and
dust, pointing nose at star and howling down through the centuries and
through him. And his cadences were their cadences, the cadences which
voiced their woe and what to them was the meaning of the stiffness, and
the cold, and dark.

Thus, as token of what a puppet thing life is, the ancient song surged
through him and he came into his own again; and he came because men had
found a yellow metal in the North, and because Manuel was a gardener’s
helper whose wages did not lap over the needs of his wife and divers
small copies of himself.



Chapter III. The Dominant Primordial Beast

The dominant primordial beast was strong in Buck, and under the fierce
conditions of trail life it grew and grew. Yet it was a secret growth.
His newborn cunning gave him poise and control. He was too busy
adjusting himself to the new life to feel at ease, and not only did he
not pick fights, but he avoided them whenever possible. A certain
deliberateness characterized his attitude. He was not prone to rashness
and precipitate action; and in the bitter hatred between him and Spitz
he betrayed no impatience, shunned all offensive acts.

On the other hand, possibly because he divined in Buck a dangerous
rival, Spitz never lost an opportunity of showing his teeth. He even
went out of his way to bully Buck, striving constantly to start the
fight which could end only in the death of one or the other. Early in
the trip this might have taken place had it not been for an unwonted
accident. At the end of this day they made a bleak and miserable camp
on the shore of Lake Le Barge. Driving snow, a wind that cut like a
white-hot knife, and darkness had forced them to grope for a camping
place. They could hardly have fared worse. At their backs rose a
perpendicular wall of rock, and Perrault and François were compelled to
make their fire and spread their sleeping robes on the ice of the lake
itself. The tent they had discarded at Dyea in order to travel light. A
few sticks of driftwood furnished them with a fire that thawed down
through the ice and left them to eat supper in the dark.

Close in under the sheltering rock Buck made his nest. So snug and warm
was it, that he was loath to leave it when François distributed the
fish which he had first thawed over the fire. But when Buck finished
his ration and returned, he found his nest occupied. A warning snarl
told him that the trespasser was Spitz. Till now Buck had avoided
trouble with his enemy, but this was too much. The beast in him roared.
He sprang upon Spitz with a fury which surprised them both, and Spitz
particularly, for his whole experience with Buck had gone to teach him
that his rival was an unusually timid dog, who managed to hold his own
only because of his great weight and size.

François was surprised, too, when they shot out in a tangle from the
disrupted nest and he divined the cause of the trouble. “A-a-ah!” he
cried to Buck. “Gif it to heem, by Gar! Gif it to heem, the dirty
t’eef!”

Spitz was equally willing. He was crying with sheer rage and eagerness
as he circled back and forth for a chance to spring in. Buck was no
less eager, and no less cautious, as he likewise circled back and forth
for the advantage. But it was then that the unexpected happened, the
thing which projected their struggle for supremacy far into the future,
past many a weary mile of trail and toil.

An oath from Perrault, the resounding impact of a club upon a bony
frame, and a shrill yelp of pain, heralded the breaking forth of
pandemonium. The camp was suddenly discovered to be alive with skulking
furry forms,—starving huskies, four or five score of them, who had
scented the camp from some Indian village. They had crept in while Buck
and Spitz were fighting, and when the two men sprang among them with
stout clubs they showed their teeth and fought back. They were crazed
by the smell of the food. Perrault found one with head buried in the
grub-box. His club landed heavily on the gaunt ribs, and the grub-box
was capsized on the ground. On the instant a score of the famished
brutes were scrambling for the bread and bacon. The clubs fell upon
them unheeded. They yelped and howled under the rain of blows, but
struggled none the less madly till the last crumb had been devoured.

In the meantime the astonished team-dogs had burst out of their nests
only to be set upon by the fierce invaders. Never had Buck seen such
dogs. It seemed as though their bones would burst through their skins.
They were mere skeletons, draped loosely in draggled hides, with
blazing eyes and slavered fangs. But the hunger-madness made them
terrifying, irresistible. There was no opposing them. The team-dogs
were swept back against the cliff at the first onset. Buck was beset by
three huskies, and in a trice his head and shoulders were ripped and
slashed. The din was frightful. Billee was crying as usual. Dave and
Sol-leks, dripping blood from a score of wounds, were fighting bravely
side by side. Joe was snapping like a demon. Once, his teeth closed on
the fore leg of a husky, and he crunched down through the bone. Pike,
the malingerer, leaped upon the crippled animal, breaking its neck with
a quick flash of teeth and a jerk, Buck got a frothing adversary by the
throat, and was sprayed with blood when his teeth sank through the
jugular. The warm taste of it in his mouth goaded him to greater
fierceness. He flung himself upon another, and at the same time felt
teeth sink into his own throat. It was Spitz, treacherously attacking
from the side.

Perrault and François, having cleaned out their part of the camp,
hurried to save their sled-dogs. The wild wave of famished beasts
rolled back before them, and Buck shook himself free. But it was only
for a moment. The two men were compelled to run back to save the grub,
upon which the huskies returned to the attack on the team. Billee,
terrified into bravery, sprang through the savage circle and fled away
over the ice. Pike and Dub followed on his heels, with the rest of the
team behind. As Buck drew himself together to spring after them, out of
the tail of his eye he saw Spitz rush upon him with the evident
intention of overthrowing him. Once off his feet and under that mass of
huskies, there was no hope for him. But he braced himself to the shock
of Spitz’s charge, then joined the flight out on the lake.

Later, the nine team-dogs gathered together and sought shelter in the
forest. Though unpursued, they were in a sorry plight. There was not
one who was not wounded in four or five places, while some were wounded
grievously. Dub was badly injured in a hind leg; Dolly, the last husky
added to the team at Dyea, had a badly torn throat; Joe had lost an
eye; while Billee, the good-natured, with an ear chewed and rent to
ribbons, cried and whimpered throughout the night. At daybreak they
limped warily back to camp, to find the marauders gone and the two men
in bad tempers. Fully half their grub supply was gone. The huskies had
chewed through the sled lashings and canvas coverings. In fact,
nothing, no matter how remotely eatable, had escaped them. They had
eaten a pair of Perrault’s moose-hide moccasins, chunks out of the
leather traces, and even two feet of lash from the end of François’s
whip. He broke from a mournful contemplation of it to look over his
wounded dogs.

“Ah, my frien’s,” he said softly, “mebbe it mek you mad dog, dose many
bites. Mebbe all mad dog, sacredam! Wot you t’ink, eh, Perrault?”

The courier shook his head dubiously. With four hundred miles of trail
still between him and Dawson, he could ill afford to have madness break
out among his dogs. Two hours of cursing and exertion got the harnesses
into shape, and the wound-stiffened team was under way, struggling
painfully over the hardest part of the trail they had yet encountered,
and for that matter, the hardest between them and Dawson.

The Thirty Mile River was wide open. Its wild water defied the frost,
and it was in the eddies only and in the quiet places that the ice held
at all. Six days of exhausting toil were required to cover those thirty
terrible miles. And terrible they were, for every foot of them was
accomplished at the risk of life to dog and man. A dozen times,
Perrault, nosing the way broke through the ice bridges, being saved by
the long pole he carried, which he so held that it fell each time
across the hole made by his body. But a cold snap was on, the
thermometer registering fifty below zero, and each time he broke
through he was compelled for very life to build a fire and dry his
garments.

Nothing daunted him. It was because nothing daunted him that he had
been chosen for government courier. He took all manner of risks,
resolutely thrusting his little weazened face into the frost and
struggling on from dim dawn to dark. He skirted the frowning shores on
rim ice that bent and crackled under foot and upon which they dared not
halt. Once, the sled broke through, with Dave and Buck, and they were
half-frozen and all but drowned by the time they were dragged out. The
usual fire was necessary to save them. They were coated solidly with
ice, and the two men kept them on the run around the fire, sweating and
thawing, so close that they were singed by the flames.

At another time Spitz went through, dragging the whole team after him
up to Buck, who strained backward with all his strength, his fore paws
on the slippery edge and the ice quivering and snapping all around. But
behind him was Dave, likewise straining backward, and behind the sled
was François, pulling till his tendons cracked.

Again, the rim ice broke away before and behind, and there was no
escape except up the cliff. Perrault scaled it by a miracle, while
François prayed for just that miracle; and with every thong and sled
lashing and the last bit of harness rove into a long rope, the dogs
were hoisted, one by one, to the cliff crest. François came up last,
after the sled and load. Then came the search for a place to descend,
which descent was ultimately made by the aid of the rope, and night
found them back on the river with a quarter of a mile to the day’s
credit.

By the time they made the Hootalinqua and good ice, Buck was played
out. The rest of the dogs were in like condition; but Perrault, to make
up lost time, pushed them late and early. The first day they covered
thirty-five miles to the Big Salmon; the next day thirty-five more to
the Little Salmon; the third day forty miles, which brought them well
up toward the Five Fingers.

Buck’s feet were not so compact and hard as the feet of the huskies.
His had softened during the many generations since the day his last
wild ancestor was tamed by a cave-dweller or river man. All day long he
limped in agony, and camp once made, lay down like a dead dog. Hungry
as he was, he would not move to receive his ration of fish, which
François had to bring to him. Also, the dog-driver rubbed Buck’s feet
for half an hour each night after supper, and sacrificed the tops of
his own moccasins to make four moccasins for Buck. This was a great
relief, and Buck caused even the weazened face of Perrault to twist
itself into a grin one morning, when François forgot the moccasins and
Buck lay on his back, his four feet waving appealingly in the air, and
refused to budge without them. Later his feet grew hard to the trail,
and the worn-out foot-gear was thrown away.

At the Pelly one morning, as they were harnessing up, Dolly, who had
never been conspicuous for anything, went suddenly mad. She announced
her condition by a long, heartbreaking wolf howl that sent every dog
bristling with fear, then sprang straight for Buck. He had never seen a
dog go mad, nor did he have any reason to fear madness; yet he knew
that here was horror, and fled away from it in a panic. Straight away
he raced, with Dolly, panting and frothing, one leap behind; nor could
she gain on him, so great was his terror, nor could he leave her, so
great was her madness. He plunged through the wooded breast of the
island, flew down to the lower end, crossed a back channel filled with
rough ice to another island, gained a third island, curved back to the
main river, and in desperation started to cross it. And all the time,
though he did not look, he could hear her snarling just one leap
behind. François called to him a quarter of a mile away and he doubled
back, still one leap ahead, gasping painfully for air and putting all
his faith in that François would save him. The dog-driver held the axe
poised in his hand, and as Buck shot past him the axe crashed down upon
mad Dolly’s head.

Buck staggered over against the sled, exhausted, sobbing for breath,
helpless. This was Spitz’s opportunity. He sprang upon Buck, and twice
his teeth sank into his unresisting foe and ripped and tore the flesh
to the bone. Then François’s lash descended, and Buck had the
satisfaction of watching Spitz receive the worst whipping as yet
administered to any of the teams.

“One devil, dat Spitz,” remarked Perrault. “Some dam day heem keel dat
Buck.”

“Dat Buck two devils,” was François’s rejoinder. “All de tam I watch
dat Buck I know for sure. Lissen: some dam fine day heem get mad lak
hell an’ den heem chew dat Spitz all up an’ spit heem out on de snow.
Sure. I know.”

From then on it was war between them. Spitz, as lead-dog and
acknowledged master of the team, felt his supremacy threatened by this
strange Southland dog. And strange Buck was to him, for of the many
Southland dogs he had known, not one had shown up worthily in camp and
on trail. They were all too soft, dying under the toil, the frost, and
starvation. Buck was the exception. He alone endured and prospered,
matching the husky in strength, savagery, and cunning. Then he was a
masterful dog, and what made him dangerous was the fact that the club
of the man in the red sweater had knocked all blind pluck and rashness
out of his desire for mastery. He was preeminently cunning, and could
bide his time with a patience that was nothing less than primitive.

It was inevitable that the clash for leadership should come. Buck
wanted it. He wanted it because it was his nature, because he had been
gripped tight by that nameless, incomprehensible pride of the trail and
trace—that pride which holds dogs in the toil to the last gasp, which
lures them to die joyfully in the harness, and breaks their hearts if
they are cut out of the harness. This was the pride of Dave as
wheel-dog, of Sol-leks as he pulled with all his strength; the pride
that laid hold of them at break of camp, transforming them from sour
and sullen brutes into straining, eager, ambitious creatures; the pride
that spurred them on all day and dropped them at pitch of camp at
night, letting them fall back into gloomy unrest and uncontent. This
was the pride that bore up Spitz and made him thrash the sled-dogs who
blundered and shirked in the traces or hid away at harness-up time in
the morning. Likewise it was this pride that made him fear Buck as a
possible lead-dog. And this was Buck’s pride, too.

He openly threatened the other’s leadership. He came between him and
the shirks he should have punished. And he did it deliberately. One
night there was a heavy snowfall, and in the morning Pike, the
malingerer, did not appear. He was securely hidden in his nest under a
foot of snow. François called him and sought him in vain. Spitz was
wild with wrath. He raged through the camp, smelling and digging in
every likely place, snarling so frightfully that Pike heard and
shivered in his hiding-place.

But when he was at last unearthed, and Spitz flew at him to punish him,
Buck flew, with equal rage, in between. So unexpected was it, and so
shrewdly managed, that Spitz was hurled backward and off his feet.
Pike, who had been trembling abjectly, took heart at this open mutiny,
and sprang upon his overthrown leader. Buck, to whom fair play was a
forgotten code, likewise sprang upon Spitz. But François, chuckling at
the incident while unswerving in the administration of justice, brought
his lash down upon Buck with all his might. This failed to drive Buck
from his prostrate rival, and the butt of the whip was brought into
play. Half-stunned by the blow, Buck was knocked backward and the lash
laid upon him again and again, while Spitz soundly punished the many
times offending Pike.

In the days that followed, as Dawson grew closer and closer, Buck still
continued to interfere between Spitz and the culprits; but he did it
craftily, when François was not around, With the covert mutiny of Buck,
a general insubordination sprang up and increased. Dave and Sol-leks
were unaffected, but the rest of the team went from bad to worse.
Things no longer went right. There was continual bickering and
jangling. Trouble was always afoot, and at the bottom of it was Buck.
He kept François busy, for the dog-driver was in constant apprehension
of the life-and-death struggle between the two which he knew must take
place sooner or later; and on more than one night the sounds of
quarrelling and strife among the other dogs turned him out of his
sleeping robe, fearful that Buck and Spitz were at it.

But the opportunity did not present itself, and they pulled into Dawson
one dreary afternoon with the great fight still to come. Here were many
men, and countless dogs, and Buck found them all at work. It seemed the
ordained order of things that dogs should work. All day they swung up
and down the main street in long teams, and in the night their jingling
bells still went by. They hauled cabin logs and firewood, freighted up
to the mines, and did all manner of work that horses did in the Santa
Clara Valley. Here and there Buck met Southland dogs, but in the main
they were the wild wolf husky breed. Every night, regularly, at nine,
at twelve, at three, they lifted a nocturnal song, a weird and eerie
chant, in which it was Buck’s delight to join.

With the aurora borealis flaming coldly overhead, or the stars leaping
in the frost dance, and the land numb and frozen under its pall of
snow, this song of the huskies might have been the defiance of life,
only it was pitched in minor key, with long-drawn wailings and
half-sobs, and was more the pleading of life, the articulate travail of
existence. It was an old song, old as the breed itself—one of the first
songs of the younger world in a day when songs were sad. It was
invested with the woe of unnumbered generations, this plaint by which
Buck was so strangely stirred. When he moaned and sobbed, it was with
the pain of living that was of old the pain of his wild fathers, and
the fear and mystery of the cold and dark that was to them fear and
mystery. And that he should be stirred by it marked the completeness
with which he harked back through the ages of fire and roof to the raw
beginnings of life in the howling ages.

Seven days from the time they pulled into Dawson, they dropped down the
steep bank by the Barracks to the Yukon Trail, and pulled for Dyea and
Salt Water. Perrault was carrying despatches if anything more urgent
than those he had brought in; also, the travel pride had gripped him,
and he purposed to make the record trip of the year. Several things
favored him in this. The week’s rest had recuperated the dogs and put
them in thorough trim. The trail they had broken into the country was
packed hard by later journeyers. And further, the police had arranged
in two or three places deposits of grub for dog and man, and he was
travelling light.

They made Sixty Mile, which is a fifty-mile run, on the first day; and
the second day saw them booming up the Yukon well on their way to
Pelly. But such splendid running was achieved not without great trouble
and vexation on the part of François. The insidious revolt led by Buck
had destroyed the solidarity of the team. It no longer was as one dog
leaping in the traces. The encouragement Buck gave the rebels led them
into all kinds of petty misdemeanors. No more was Spitz a leader
greatly to be feared. The old awe departed, and they grew equal to
challenging his authority. Pike robbed him of half a fish one night,
and gulped it down under the protection of Buck. Another night Dub and
Joe fought Spitz and made him forego the punishment they deserved. And
even Billee, the good-natured, was less good-natured, and whined not
half so placatingly as in former days. Buck never came near Spitz
without snarling and bristling menacingly. In fact, his conduct
approached that of a bully, and he was given to swaggering up and down
before Spitz’s very nose.

The breaking down of discipline likewise affected the dogs in their
relations with one another. They quarrelled and bickered more than ever
among themselves, till at times the camp was a howling bedlam. Dave and
Sol-leks alone were unaltered, though they were made irritable by the
unending squabbling. François swore strange barbarous oaths, and
stamped the snow in futile rage, and tore his hair. His lash was always
singing among the dogs, but it was of small avail. Directly his back
was turned they were at it again. He backed up Spitz with his whip,
while Buck backed up the remainder of the team. François knew he was
behind all the trouble, and Buck knew he knew; but Buck was too clever
ever again to be caught red-handed. He worked faithfully in the
harness, for the toil had become a delight to him; yet it was a greater
delight slyly to precipitate a fight amongst his mates and tangle the
traces.

At the mouth of the Tahkeena, one night after supper, Dub turned up a
snowshoe rabbit, blundered it, and missed. In a second the whole team
was in full cry. A hundred yards away was a camp of the Northwest
Police, with fifty dogs, huskies all, who joined the chase. The rabbit
sped down the river, turned off into a small creek, up the frozen bed
of which it held steadily. It ran lightly on the surface of the snow,
while the dogs ploughed through by main strength. Buck led the pack,
sixty strong, around bend after bend, but he could not gain. He lay
down low to the race, whining eagerly, his splendid body flashing
forward, leap by leap, in the wan white moonlight. And leap by leap,
like some pale frost wraith, the snowshoe rabbit flashed on ahead.

All that stirring of old instincts which at stated periods drives men
out from the sounding cities to forest and plain to kill things by
chemically propelled leaden pellets, the blood lust, the joy to
kill—all this was Buck’s, only it was infinitely more intimate. He was
ranging at the head of the pack, running the wild thing down, the
living meat, to kill with his own teeth and wash his muzzle to the eyes
in warm blood.

There is an ecstasy that marks the summit of life, and beyond which
life cannot rise. And such is the paradox of living, this ecstasy comes
when one is most alive, and it comes as a complete forgetfulness that
one is alive. This ecstasy, this forgetfulness of living, comes to the
artist, caught up and out of himself in a sheet of flame; it comes to
the soldier, war-mad on a stricken field and refusing quarter; and it
came to Buck, leading the pack, sounding the old wolf-cry, straining
after the food that was alive and that fled swiftly before him through
the moonlight. He was sounding the deeps of his nature, and of the
parts of his nature that were deeper than he, going back into the womb
of Time. He was mastered by the sheer surging of life, the tidal wave
of being, the perfect joy of each separate muscle, joint, and sinew in
that it was everything that was not death, that it was aglow and
rampant, expressing itself in movement, flying exultantly under the
stars and over the face of dead matter that did not move.

But Spitz, cold and calculating even in his supreme moods, left the
pack and cut across a narrow neck of land where the creek made a long
bend around. Buck did not know of this, and as he rounded the bend, the
frost wraith of a rabbit still flitting before him, he saw another and
larger frost wraith leap from the overhanging bank into the immediate
path of the rabbit. It was Spitz. The rabbit could not turn, and as the
white teeth broke its back in mid air it shrieked as loudly as a
stricken man may shriek. At sound of this, the cry of Life plunging
down from Life’s apex in the grip of Death, the fall pack at Buck’s
heels raised a hell’s chorus of delight.

Buck did not cry out. He did not check himself, but drove in upon
Spitz, shoulder to shoulder, so hard that he missed the throat. They
rolled over and over in the powdery snow. Spitz gained his feet almost
as though he had not been overthrown, slashing Buck down the shoulder
and leaping clear. Twice his teeth clipped together, like the steel
jaws of a trap, as he backed away for better footing, with lean and
lifting lips that writhed and snarled.

In a flash Buck knew it. The time had come. It was to the death. As
they circled about, snarling, ears laid back, keenly watchful for the
advantage, the scene came to Buck with a sense of familiarity. He
seemed to remember it all,—the white woods, and earth, and moonlight,
and the thrill of battle. Over the whiteness and silence brooded a
ghostly calm. There was not the faintest whisper of air—nothing moved,
not a leaf quivered, the visible breaths of the dogs rising slowly and
lingering in the frosty air. They had made short work of the snowshoe
rabbit, these dogs that were ill-tamed wolves; and they were now drawn
up in an expectant circle. They, too, were silent, their eyes only
gleaming and their breaths drifting slowly upward. To Buck it was
nothing new or strange, this scene of old time. It was as though it had
always been, the wonted way of things.

Spitz was a practised fighter. From Spitzbergen through the Arctic, and
across Canada and the Barrens, he had held his own with all manner of
dogs and achieved to mastery over them. Bitter rage was his, but never
blind rage. In passion to rend and destroy, he never forgot that his
enemy was in like passion to rend and destroy. He never rushed till he
was prepared to receive a rush; never attacked till he had first
defended that attack.

In vain Buck strove to sink his teeth in the neck of the big white dog.
Wherever his fangs struck for the softer flesh, they were countered by
the fangs of Spitz. Fang clashed fang, and lips were cut and bleeding,
but Buck could not penetrate his enemy’s guard. Then he warmed up and
enveloped Spitz in a whirlwind of rushes. Time and time again he tried
for the snow-white throat, where life bubbled near to the surface, and
each time and every time Spitz slashed him and got away. Then Buck took
to rushing, as though for the throat, when, suddenly drawing back his
head and curving in from the side, he would drive his shoulder at the
shoulder of Spitz, as a ram by which to overthrow him. But instead,
Buck’s shoulder was slashed down each time as Spitz leaped lightly
away.

Spitz was untouched, while Buck was streaming with blood and panting
hard. The fight was growing desperate. And all the while the silent and
wolfish circle waited to finish off whichever dog went down. As Buck
grew winded, Spitz took to rushing, and he kept him staggering for
footing. Once Buck went over, and the whole circle of sixty dogs
started up; but he recovered himself, almost in mid air, and the circle
sank down again and waited.

But Buck possessed a quality that made for greatness—imagination. He
fought by instinct, but he could fight by head as well. He rushed, as
though attempting the old shoulder trick, but at the last instant swept
low to the snow and in. His teeth closed on Spitz’s left fore leg.
There was a crunch of breaking bone, and the white dog faced him on
three legs. Thrice he tried to knock him over, then repeated the trick
and broke the right fore leg. Despite the pain and helplessness, Spitz
struggled madly to keep up. He saw the silent circle, with gleaming
eyes, lolling tongues, and silvery breaths drifting upward, closing in
upon him as he had seen similar circles close in upon beaten
antagonists in the past. Only this time he was the one who was beaten.

There was no hope for him. Buck was inexorable. Mercy was a thing
reserved for gentler climes. He manœuvred for the final rush. The
circle had tightened till he could feel the breaths of the huskies on
his flanks. He could see them, beyond Spitz and to either side, half
crouching for the spring, their eyes fixed upon him. A pause seemed to
fall. Every animal was motionless as though turned to stone. Only Spitz
quivered and bristled as he staggered back and forth, snarling with
horrible menace, as though to frighten off impending death. Then Buck
sprang in and out; but while he was in, shoulder had at last squarely
met shoulder. The dark circle became a dot on the moon-flooded snow as
Spitz disappeared from view. Buck stood and looked on, the successful
champion, the dominant primordial beast who had made his kill and found
it good.



Chapter IV. Who Has Won to Mastership

“Eh? Wot I say? I spik true w’en I say dat Buck two devils.” This was
François’s speech next morning when he discovered Spitz missing and
Buck covered with wounds. He drew him to the fire and by its light
pointed them out.

“Dat Spitz fight lak hell,” said Perrault, as he surveyed the gaping
rips and cuts.

“An’ dat Buck fight lak two hells,” was François’s answer. “An’ now we
make good time. No more Spitz, no more trouble, sure.”

While Perrault packed the camp outfit and loaded the sled, the
dog-driver proceeded to harness the dogs. Buck trotted up to the place
Spitz would have occupied as leader; but François, not noticing him,
brought Sol-leks to the coveted position. In his judgment, Sol-leks was
the best lead-dog left. Buck sprang upon Sol-leks in a fury, driving
him back and standing in his place.

“Eh? eh?” François cried, slapping his thighs gleefully. “Look at dat
Buck. Heem keel dat Spitz, heem t’ink to take de job.”

“Go ’way, Chook!” he cried, but Buck refused to budge.

He took Buck by the scruff of the neck, and though the dog growled
threateningly, dragged him to one side and replaced Sol-leks. The old
dog did not like it, and showed plainly that he was afraid of Buck.
François was obdurate, but when he turned his back Buck again displaced
Sol-leks, who was not at all unwilling to go.

François was angry. “Now, by Gar, I feex you!” he cried, coming back
with a heavy club in his hand.

Buck remembered the man in the red sweater, and retreated slowly; nor
did he attempt to charge in when Sol-leks was once more brought
forward. But he circled just beyond the range of the club, snarling
with bitterness and rage; and while he circled he watched the club so
as to dodge it if thrown by François, for he was become wise in the way
of clubs. The driver went about his work, and he called to Buck when he
was ready to put him in his old place in front of Dave. Buck retreated
two or three steps. François followed him up, whereupon he again
retreated. After some time of this, François threw down the club,
thinking that Buck feared a thrashing. But Buck was in open revolt. He
wanted, not to escape a clubbing, but to have the leadership. It was
his by right. He had earned it, and he would not be content with less.

Perrault took a hand. Between them they ran him about for the better
part of an hour. They threw clubs at him. He dodged. They cursed him,
and his fathers and mothers before him, and all his seed to come after
him down to the remotest generation, and every hair on his body and
drop of blood in his veins; and he answered curse with snarl and kept
out of their reach. He did not try to run away, but retreated around
and around the camp, advertising plainly that when his desire was met,
he would come in and be good.

François sat down and scratched his head. Perrault looked at his watch
and swore. Time was flying, and they should have been on the trail an
hour gone. François scratched his head again. He shook it and grinned
sheepishly at the courier, who shrugged his shoulders in sign that they
were beaten. Then François went up to where Sol-leks stood and called
to Buck. Buck laughed, as dogs laugh, yet kept his distance. François
unfastened Sol-leks’s traces and put him back in his old place. The
team stood harnessed to the sled in an unbroken line, ready for the
trail. There was no place for Buck save at the front. Once more
François called, and once more Buck laughed and kept away.

“T’row down de club,” Perrault commanded.

François complied, whereupon Buck trotted in, laughing triumphantly,
and swung around into position at the head of the team. His traces were
fastened, the sled broken out, and with both men running they dashed
out on to the river trail.

Highly as the dog-driver had forevalued Buck, with his two devils, he
found, while the day was yet young, that he had undervalued. At a bound
Buck took up the duties of leadership; and where judgment was required,
and quick thinking and quick acting, he showed himself the superior
even of Spitz, of whom François had never seen an equal.

But it was in giving the law and making his mates live up to it, that
Buck excelled. Dave and Sol-leks did not mind the change in leadership.
It was none of their business. Their business was to toil, and toil
mightily, in the traces. So long as that were not interfered with, they
did not care what happened. Billee, the good-natured, could lead for
all they cared, so long as he kept order. The rest of the team,
however, had grown unruly during the last days of Spitz, and their
surprise was great now that Buck proceeded to lick them into shape.

Pike, who pulled at Buck’s heels, and who never put an ounce more of
his weight against the breast-band than he was compelled to do, was
swiftly and repeatedly shaken for loafing; and ere the first day was
done he was pulling more than ever before in his life. The first night
in camp, Joe, the sour one, was punished roundly—a thing that Spitz had
never succeeded in doing. Buck simply smothered him by virtue of
superior weight, and cut him up till he ceased snapping and began to
whine for mercy.

The general tone of the team picked up immediately. It recovered its
old-time solidarity, and once more the dogs leaped as one dog in the
traces. At the Rink Rapids two native huskies, Teek and Koona, were
added; and the celerity with which Buck broke them in took away
François’s breath.

“Nevaire such a dog as dat Buck!” he cried. “No, nevaire! Heem worth
one t’ousan’ dollair, by Gar! Eh? Wot you say, Perrault?”

And Perrault nodded. He was ahead of the record then, and gaining day
by day. The trail was in excellent condition, well packed and hard, and
there was no new-fallen snow with which to contend. It was not too
cold. The temperature dropped to fifty below zero and remained there
the whole trip. The men rode and ran by turn, and the dogs were kept on
the jump, with but infrequent stoppages.

The Thirty Mile River was comparatively coated with ice, and they
covered in one day going out what had taken them ten days coming in. In
one run they made a sixty-mile dash from the foot of Lake Le Barge to
the White Horse Rapids. Across Marsh, Tagish, and Bennett (seventy
miles of lakes), they flew so fast that the man whose turn it was to
run towed behind the sled at the end of a rope. And on the last night
of the second week they topped White Pass and dropped down the sea
slope with the lights of Skaguay and of the shipping at their feet.

It was a record run. Each day for fourteen days they had averaged forty
miles. For three days Perrault and François threw chests up and down
the main street of Skaguay and were deluged with invitations to drink,
while the team was the constant centre of a worshipful crowd of
dog-busters and mushers. Then three or four western bad men aspired to
clean out the town, were riddled like pepper-boxes for their pains, and
public interest turned to other idols. Next came official orders.
François called Buck to him, threw his arms around him, wept over him.
And that was the last of François and Perrault. Like other men, they
passed out of Buck’s life for good.

A Scotch half-breed took charge of him and his mates, and in company
with a dozen other dog-teams he started back over the weary trail to
Dawson. It was no light running now, nor record time, but heavy toil
each day, with a heavy load behind; for this was the mail train,
carrying word from the world to the men who sought gold under the
shadow of the Pole.

Buck did not like it, but he bore up well to the work, taking pride in
it after the manner of Dave and Sol-leks, and seeing that his mates,
whether they prided in it or not, did their fair share. It was a
monotonous life, operating with machine-like regularity. One day was
very like another. At a certain time each morning the cooks turned out,
fires were built, and breakfast was eaten. Then, while some broke camp,
others harnessed the dogs, and they were under way an hour or so before
the darkness fell which gave warning of dawn. At night, camp was made.
Some pitched the flies, others cut firewood and pine boughs for the
beds, and still others carried water or ice for the cooks. Also, the
dogs were fed. To them, this was the one feature of the day, though it
was good to loaf around, after the fish was eaten, for an hour or so
with the other dogs, of which there were fivescore and odd. There were
fierce fighters among them, but three battles with the fiercest brought
Buck to mastery, so that when he bristled and showed his teeth they got
out of his way.

Best of all, perhaps, he loved to lie near the fire, hind legs crouched
under him, fore legs stretched out in front, head raised, and eyes
blinking dreamily at the flames. Sometimes he thought of Judge Miller’s
big house in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley, and of the cement
swimming-tank, and Ysabel, the Mexican hairless, and Toots, the
Japanese pug; but oftener he remembered the man in the red sweater, the
death of Curly, the great fight with Spitz, and the good things he had
eaten or would like to eat. He was not homesick. The Sunland was very
dim and distant, and such memories had no power over him. Far more
potent were the memories of his heredity that gave things he had never
seen before a seeming familiarity; the instincts (which were but the
memories of his ancestors become habits) which had lapsed in later
days, and still later, in him, quickened and become alive again.

Sometimes as he crouched there, blinking dreamily at the flames, it
seemed that the flames were of another fire, and that as he crouched by
this other fire he saw another and different man from the half-breed
cook before him. This other man was shorter of leg and longer of arm,
with muscles that were stringy and knotty rather than rounded and
swelling. The hair of this man was long and matted, and his head
slanted back under it from the eyes. He uttered strange sounds, and
seemed very much afraid of the darkness, into which he peered
continually, clutching in his hand, which hung midway between knee and
foot, a stick with a heavy stone made fast to the end. He was all but
naked, a ragged and fire-scorched skin hanging part way down his back,
but on his body there was much hair. In some places, across the chest
and shoulders and down the outside of the arms and thighs, it was
matted into almost a thick fur. He did not stand erect, but with trunk
inclined forward from the hips, on legs that bent at the knees. About
his body there was a peculiar springiness, or resiliency, almost
catlike, and a quick alertness as of one who lived in perpetual fear of
things seen and unseen.

At other times this hairy man squatted by the fire with head between
his legs and slept. On such occasions his elbows were on his knees, his
hands clasped above his head as though to shed rain by the hairy arms.
And beyond that fire, in the circling darkness, Buck could see many
gleaming coals, two by two, always two by two, which he knew to be the
eyes of great beasts of prey. And he could hear the crashing of their
bodies through the undergrowth, and the noises they made in the night.
And dreaming there by the Yukon bank, with lazy eyes blinking at the
fire, these sounds and sights of another world would make the hair to
rise along his back and stand on end across his shoulders and up his
neck, till he whimpered low and suppressedly, or growled softly, and
the half-breed cook shouted at him, “Hey, you Buck, wake up!” Whereupon
the other world would vanish and the real world come into his eyes, and
he would get up and yawn and stretch as though he had been asleep.

It was a hard trip, with the mail behind them, and the heavy work wore
them down. They were short of weight and in poor condition when they
made Dawson, and should have had a ten days’ or a week’s rest at least.
But in two days’ time they dropped down the Yukon bank from the
Barracks, loaded with letters for the outside. The dogs were tired, the
drivers grumbling, and to make matters worse, it snowed every day. This
meant a soft trail, greater friction on the runners, and heavier
pulling for the dogs; yet the drivers were fair through it all, and did
their best for the animals.

Each night the dogs were attended to first. They ate before the drivers
ate, and no man sought his sleeping-robe till he had seen to the feet
of the dogs he drove. Still, their strength went down. Since the
beginning of the winter they had travelled eighteen hundred miles,
dragging sleds the whole weary distance; and eighteen hundred miles
will tell upon life of the toughest. Buck stood it, keeping his mates
up to their work and maintaining discipline, though he, too, was very
tired. Billee cried and whimpered regularly in his sleep each night.
Joe was sourer than ever, and Sol-leks was unapproachable, blind side
or other side.

But it was Dave who suffered most of all. Something had gone wrong with
him. He became more morose and irritable, and when camp was pitched at
once made his nest, where his driver fed him. Once out of the harness
and down, he did not get on his feet again till harness-up time in the
morning. Sometimes, in the traces, when jerked by a sudden stoppage of
the sled, or by straining to start it, he would cry out with pain. The
driver examined him, but could find nothing. All the drivers became
interested in his case. They talked it over at meal-time, and over
their last pipes before going to bed, and one night they held a
consultation. He was brought from his nest to the fire and was pressed
and prodded till he cried out many times. Something was wrong inside,
but they could locate no broken bones, could not make it out.

By the time Cassiar Bar was reached, he was so weak that he was falling
repeatedly in the traces. The Scotch half-breed called a halt and took
him out of the team, making the next dog, Sol-leks, fast to the sled.
His intention was to rest Dave, letting him run free behind the sled.
Sick as he was, Dave resented being taken out, grunting and growling
while the traces were unfastened, and whimpering broken-heartedly when
he saw Sol-leks in the position he had held and served so long. For the
pride of trace and trail was his, and, sick unto death, he could not
bear that another dog should do his work.

When the sled started, he floundered in the soft snow alongside the
beaten trail, attacking Sol-leks with his teeth, rushing against him
and trying to thrust him off into the soft snow on the other side,
striving to leap inside his traces and get between him and the sled,
and all the while whining and yelping and crying with grief and pain.
The half-breed tried to drive him away with the whip; but he paid no
heed to the stinging lash, and the man had not the heart to strike
harder. Dave refused to run quietly on the trail behind the sled, where
the going was easy, but continued to flounder alongside in the soft
snow, where the going was most difficult, till exhausted. Then he fell,
and lay where he fell, howling lugubriously as the long train of sleds
churned by.

With the last remnant of his strength he managed to stagger along
behind till the train made another stop, when he floundered past the
sleds to his own, where he stood alongside Sol-leks. His driver
lingered a moment to get a light for his pipe from the man behind. Then
he returned and started his dogs. They swung out on the trail with
remarkable lack of exertion, turned their heads uneasily, and stopped
in surprise. The driver was surprised, too; the sled had not moved. He
called his comrades to witness the sight. Dave had bitten through both
of Sol-leks’s traces, and was standing directly in front of the sled in
his proper place.

He pleaded with his eyes to remain there. The driver was perplexed. His
comrades talked of how a dog could break its heart through being denied
the work that killed it, and recalled instances they had known, where
dogs, too old for the toil, or injured, had died because they were cut
out of the traces. Also, they held it a mercy, since Dave was to die
anyway, that he should die in the traces, heart-easy and content. So he
was harnessed in again, and proudly he pulled as of old, though more
than once he cried out involuntarily from the bite of his inward hurt.
Several times he fell down and was dragged in the traces, and once the
sled ran upon him so that he limped thereafter in one of his hind legs.

But he held out till camp was reached, when his driver made a place for
him by the fire. Morning found him too weak to travel. At harness-up
time he tried to crawl to his driver. By convulsive efforts he got on
his feet, staggered, and fell. Then he wormed his way forward slowly
toward where the harnesses were being put on his mates. He would
advance his fore legs and drag up his body with a sort of hitching
movement, when he would advance his fore legs and hitch ahead again for
a few more inches. His strength left him, and the last his mates saw of
him he lay gasping in the snow and yearning toward them. But they could
hear him mournfully howling till they passed out of sight behind a belt
of river timber.

Here the train was halted. The Scotch half-breed slowly retraced his
steps to the camp they had left. The men ceased talking. A
revolver-shot rang out. The man came back hurriedly. The whips snapped,
the bells tinkled merrily, the sleds churned along the trail; but Buck
knew, and every dog knew, what had taken place behind the belt of river
trees.



Chapter V. The Toil of Trace and Trail

Thirty days from the time it left Dawson, the Salt Water Mail, with
Buck and his mates at the fore, arrived at Skaguay. They were in a
wretched state, worn out and worn down. Buck’s one hundred and forty
pounds had dwindled to one hundred and fifteen. The rest of his mates,
though lighter dogs, had relatively lost more weight than he. Pike, the
malingerer, who, in his lifetime of deceit, had often successfully
feigned a hurt leg, was now limping in earnest. Sol-leks was limping,
and Dub was suffering from a wrenched shoulder-blade.

They were all terribly footsore. No spring or rebound was left in them.
Their feet fell heavily on the trail, jarring their bodies and doubling
the fatigue of a day’s travel. There was nothing the matter with them
except that they were dead tired. It was not the dead-tiredness that
comes through brief and excessive effort, from which recovery is a
matter of hours; but it was the dead-tiredness that comes through the
slow and prolonged strength drainage of months of toil. There was no
power of recuperation left, no reserve strength to call upon. It had
been all used, the last least bit of it. Every muscle, every fibre,
every cell, was tired, dead tired. And there was reason for it. In less
than five months they had travelled twenty-five hundred miles, during
the last eighteen hundred of which they had had but five days’ rest.
When they arrived at Skaguay they were apparently on their last legs.
They could barely keep the traces taut, and on the down grades just
managed to keep out of the way of the sled.

“Mush on, poor sore feets,” the driver encouraged them as they tottered
down the main street of Skaguay. “Dis is de las’. Den we get one long
res’. Eh? For sure. One bully long res’.”

The drivers confidently expected a long stopover. Themselves, they had
covered twelve hundred miles with two days’ rest, and in the nature of
reason and common justice they deserved an interval of loafing. But so
many were the men who had rushed into the Klondike, and so many were
the sweethearts, wives, and kin that had not rushed in, that the
congested mail was taking on Alpine proportions; also, there were
official orders. Fresh batches of Hudson Bay dogs were to take the
places of those worthless for the trail. The worthless ones were to be
got rid of, and, since dogs count for little against dollars, they were
to be sold.

Three days passed, by which time Buck and his mates found how really
tired and weak they were. Then, on the morning of the fourth day, two
men from the States came along and bought them, harness and all, for a
song. The men addressed each other as “Hal” and “Charles.” Charles was
a middle-aged, lightish-colored man, with weak and watery eyes and a
mustache that twisted fiercely and vigorously up, giving the lie to the
limply drooping lip it concealed. Hal was a youngster of nineteen or
twenty, with a big Colt’s revolver and a hunting-knife strapped about
him on a belt that fairly bristled with cartridges. This belt was the
most salient thing about him. It advertised his callowness—a callowness
sheer and unutterable. Both men were manifestly out of place, and why
such as they should adventure the North is part of the mystery of
things that passes understanding.

Buck heard the chaffering, saw the money pass between the man and the
Government agent, and knew that the Scotch half-breed and the
mail-train drivers were passing out of his life on the heels of
Perrault and François and the others who had gone before. When driven
with his mates to the new owners’ camp, Buck saw a slipshod and
slovenly affair, tent half stretched, dishes unwashed, everything in
disorder; also, he saw a woman. “Mercedes” the men called her. She was
Charles’s wife and Hal’s sister—a nice family party.

Buck watched them apprehensively as they proceeded to take down the
tent and load the sled. There was a great deal of effort about their
manner, but no businesslike method. The tent was rolled into an awkward
bundle three times as large as it should have been. The tin dishes were
packed away unwashed. Mercedes continually fluttered in the way of her
men and kept up an unbroken chattering of remonstrance and advice. When
they put a clothes-sack on the front of the sled, she suggested it
should go on the back; and when they had put it on the back, and
covered it over with a couple of other bundles, she discovered
overlooked articles which could abide nowhere else but in that very
sack, and they unloaded again.

Three men from a neighboring tent came out and looked on, grinning and
winking at one another.

“You’ve got a right smart load as it is,” said one of them; “and it’s
not me should tell you your business, but I wouldn’t tote that tent
along if I was you.”

“Undreamed of!” cried Mercedes, throwing up her hands in dainty dismay.
“However in the world could I manage without a tent?”

“It’s springtime, and you won’t get any more cold weather,” the man
replied.

She shook her head decidedly, and Charles and Hal put the last odds and
ends on top the mountainous load.

“Think it’ll ride?” one of the men asked.

“Why shouldn’t it?” Charles demanded rather shortly.

“Oh, that’s all right, that’s all right,” the man hastened meekly to
say. “I was just a-wonderin’, that is all. It seemed a mite top-heavy.”

Charles turned his back and drew the lashings down as well as he could,
which was not in the least well.

“An’ of course the dogs can hike along all day with that contraption
behind them,” affirmed a second of the men.

“Certainly,” said Hal, with freezing politeness, taking hold of the
gee-pole with one hand and swinging his whip from the other. “Mush!” he
shouted. “Mush on there!”

The dogs sprang against the breast-bands, strained hard for a few
moments, then relaxed. They were unable to move the sled.

“The lazy brutes, I’ll show them,” he cried, preparing to lash out at
them with the whip.

But Mercedes interfered, crying, “Oh, Hal, you mustn’t,” as she caught
hold of the whip and wrenched it from him. “The poor dears! Now you
must promise you won’t be harsh with them for the rest of the trip, or
I won’t go a step.”

“Precious lot you know about dogs,” her brother sneered; “and I wish
you’d leave me alone. They’re lazy, I tell you, and you’ve got to whip
them to get anything out of them. That’s their way. You ask any one.
Ask one of those men.”

Mercedes looked at them imploringly, untold repugnance at sight of pain
written in her pretty face.

“They’re weak as water, if you want to know,” came the reply from one
of the men. “Plum tuckered out, that’s what’s the matter. They need a
rest.”

“Rest be blanked,” said Hal, with his beardless lips; and Mercedes
said, “Oh!” in pain and sorrow at the oath.

But she was a clannish creature, and rushed at once to the defence of
her brother. “Never mind that man,” she said pointedly. “You’re driving
our dogs, and you do what you think best with them.”

Again Hal’s whip fell upon the dogs. They threw themselves against the
breast-bands, dug their feet into the packed snow, got down low to it,
and put forth all their strength. The sled held as though it were an
anchor. After two efforts, they stood still, panting. The whip was
whistling savagely, when once more Mercedes interfered. She dropped on
her knees before Buck, with tears in her eyes, and put her arms around
his neck.

“You poor, poor dears,” she cried sympathetically, “why don’t you pull
hard?—then you wouldn’t be whipped.” Buck did not like her, but he was
feeling too miserable to resist her, taking it as part of the day’s
miserable work.

One of the onlookers, who had been clenching his teeth to suppress hot
speech, now spoke up:—

“It’s not that I care a whoop what becomes of you, but for the dogs’
sakes I just want to tell you, you can help them a mighty lot by
breaking out that sled. The runners are froze fast. Throw your weight
against the gee-pole, right and left, and break it out.”

A third time the attempt was made, but this time, following the advice,
Hal broke out the runners which had been frozen to the snow. The
overloaded and unwieldy sled forged ahead, Buck and his mates
struggling frantically under the rain of blows. A hundred yards ahead
the path turned and sloped steeply into the main street. It would have
required an experienced man to keep the top-heavy sled upright, and Hal
was not such a man. As they swung on the turn the sled went over,
spilling half its load through the loose lashings. The dogs never
stopped. The lightened sled bounded on its side behind them. They were
angry because of the ill treatment they had received and the unjust
load. Buck was raging. He broke into a run, the team following his
lead. Hal cried “Whoa! whoa!” but they gave no heed. He tripped and was
pulled off his feet. The capsized sled ground over him, and the dogs
dashed on up the street, adding to the gayety of Skaguay as they
scattered the remainder of the outfit along its chief thoroughfare.

Kind-hearted citizens caught the dogs and gathered up the scattered
belongings. Also, they gave advice. Half the load and twice the dogs,
if they ever expected to reach Dawson, was what was said. Hal and his
sister and brother-in-law listened unwillingly, pitched tent, and
overhauled the outfit. Canned goods were turned out that made men
laugh, for canned goods on the Long Trail is a thing to dream about.
“Blankets for a hotel” quoth one of the men who laughed and helped.
“Half as many is too much; get rid of them. Throw away that tent, and
all those dishes,—who’s going to wash them, anyway? Good Lord, do you
think you’re travelling on a Pullman?”

And so it went, the inexorable elimination of the superfluous. Mercedes
cried when her clothes-bags were dumped on the ground and article after
article was thrown out. She cried in general, and she cried in
particular over each discarded thing. She clasped hands about knees,
rocking back and forth broken-heartedly. She averred she would not go
an inch, not for a dozen Charleses. She appealed to everybody and to
everything, finally wiping her eyes and proceeding to cast out even
articles of apparel that were imperative necessaries. And in her zeal,
when she had finished with her own, she attacked the belongings of her
men and went through them like a tornado.

This accomplished, the outfit, though cut in half, was still a
formidable bulk. Charles and Hal went out in the evening and bought six
Outside dogs. These, added to the six of the original team, and Teek
and Koona, the huskies obtained at the Rink Rapids on the record trip,
brought the team up to fourteen. But the Outside dogs, though
practically broken in since their landing, did not amount to much.
Three were short-haired pointers, one was a Newfoundland, and the other
two were mongrels of indeterminate breed. They did not seem to know
anything, these newcomers. Buck and his comrades looked upon them with
disgust, and though he speedily taught them their places and what not
to do, he could not teach them what to do. They did not take kindly to
trace and trail. With the exception of the two mongrels, they were
bewildered and spirit-broken by the strange savage environment in which
they found themselves and by the ill treatment they had received. The
two mongrels were without spirit at all; bones were the only things
breakable about them.

With the newcomers hopeless and forlorn, and the old team worn out by
twenty-five hundred miles of continuous trail, the outlook was anything
but bright. The two men, however, were quite cheerful. And they were
proud, too. They were doing the thing in style, with fourteen dogs.
They had seen other sleds depart over the Pass for Dawson, or come in
from Dawson, but never had they seen a sled with so many as fourteen
dogs. In the nature of Arctic travel there was a reason why fourteen
dogs should not drag one sled, and that was that one sled could not
carry the food for fourteen dogs. But Charles and Hal did not know
this. They had worked the trip out with a pencil, so much to a dog, so
many dogs, so many days, Q.E.D. Mercedes looked over their shoulders
and nodded comprehensively, it was all so very simple.

Late next morning Buck led the long team up the street. There was
nothing lively about it, no snap or go in him and his fellows. They
were starting dead weary. Four times he had covered the distance
between Salt Water and Dawson, and the knowledge that, jaded and tired,
he was facing the same trail once more, made him bitter. His heart was
not in the work, nor was the heart of any dog. The Outsides were timid
and frightened, the Insides without confidence in their masters.

Buck felt vaguely that there was no depending upon these two men and
the woman. They did not know how to do anything, and as the days went
by it became apparent that they could not learn. They were slack in all
things, without order or discipline. It took them half the night to
pitch a slovenly camp, and half the morning to break that camp and get
the sled loaded in fashion so slovenly that for the rest of the day
they were occupied in stopping and rearranging the load. Some days they
did not make ten miles. On other days they were unable to get started
at all. And on no day did they succeed in making more than half the
distance used by the men as a basis in their dog-food computation.

It was inevitable that they should go short on dog-food. But they
hastened it by overfeeding, bringing the day nearer when underfeeding
would commence. The Outside dogs, whose digestions had not been trained
by chronic famine to make the most of little, had voracious appetites.
And when, in addition to this, the worn-out huskies pulled weakly, Hal
decided that the orthodox ration was too small. He doubled it. And to
cap it all, when Mercedes, with tears in her pretty eyes and a quaver
in her throat, could not cajole him into giving the dogs still more,
she stole from the fish-sacks and fed them slyly. But it was not food
that Buck and the huskies needed, but rest. And though they were making
poor time, the heavy load they dragged sapped their strength severely.

Then came the underfeeding. Hal awoke one day to the fact that his
dog-food was half gone and the distance only quarter covered; further,
that for love or money no additional dog-food was to be obtained. So he
cut down even the orthodox ration and tried to increase the day’s
travel. His sister and brother-in-law seconded him; but they were
frustrated by their heavy outfit and their own incompetence. It was a
simple matter to give the dogs less food; but it was impossible to make
the dogs travel faster, while their own inability to get under way
earlier in the morning prevented them from travelling longer hours. Not
only did they not know how to work dogs, but they did not know how to
work themselves.

The first to go was Dub. Poor blundering thief that he was, always
getting caught and punished, he had none the less been a faithful
worker. His wrenched shoulder-blade, untreated and unrested, went from
bad to worse, till finally Hal shot him with the big Colt’s revolver.
It is a saying of the country that an Outside dog starves to death on
the ration of the husky, so the six Outside dogs under Buck could do no
less than die on half the ration of the husky. The Newfoundland went
first, followed by the three short-haired pointers, the two mongrels
hanging more grittily on to life, but going in the end.

By this time all the amenities and gentlenesses of the Southland had
fallen away from the three people. Shorn of its glamour and romance,
Arctic travel became to them a reality too harsh for their manhood and
womanhood. Mercedes ceased weeping over the dogs, being too occupied
with weeping over herself and with quarrelling with her husband and
brother. To quarrel was the one thing they were never too weary to do.
Their irritability arose out of their misery, increased with it,
doubled upon it, outdistanced it. The wonderful patience of the trail
which comes to men who toil hard and suffer sore, and remain sweet of
speech and kindly, did not come to these two men and the woman. They
had no inkling of such a patience. They were stiff and in pain; their
muscles ached, their bones ached, their very hearts ached; and because
of this they became sharp of speech, and hard words were first on their
lips in the morning and last at night.

Charles and Hal wrangled whenever Mercedes gave them a chance. It was
the cherished belief of each that he did more than his share of the
work, and neither forbore to speak this belief at every opportunity.
Sometimes Mercedes sided with her husband, sometimes with her brother.
The result was a beautiful and unending family quarrel. Starting from a
dispute as to which should chop a few sticks for the fire (a dispute
which concerned only Charles and Hal), presently would be lugged in the
rest of the family, fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins, people thousands
of miles away, and some of them dead. That Hal’s views on art, or the
sort of society plays his mother’s brother wrote, should have anything
to do with the chopping of a few sticks of firewood, passes
comprehension; nevertheless the quarrel was as likely to tend in that
direction as in the direction of Charles’s political prejudices. And
that Charles’s sister’s tale-bearing tongue should be relevant to the
building of a Yukon fire, was apparent only to Mercedes, who
disburdened herself of copious opinions upon that topic, and
incidentally upon a few other traits unpleasantly peculiar to her
husband’s family. In the meantime the fire remained unbuilt, the camp
half pitched, and the dogs unfed.

Mercedes nursed a special grievance—the grievance of sex. She was
pretty and soft, and had been chivalrously treated all her days. But
the present treatment by her husband and brother was everything save
chivalrous. It was her custom to be helpless. They complained. Upon
which impeachment of what to her was her most essential
sex-prerogative, she made their lives unendurable. She no longer
considered the dogs, and because she was sore and tired, she persisted
in riding on the sled. She was pretty and soft, but she weighed one
hundred and twenty pounds—a lusty last straw to the load dragged by the
weak and starving animals. She rode for days, till they fell in the
traces and the sled stood still. Charles and Hal begged her to get off
and walk, pleaded with her, entreated, the while she wept and
importuned Heaven with a recital of their brutality.

On one occasion they took her off the sled by main strength. They never
did it again. She let her legs go limp like a spoiled child, and sat
down on the trail. They went on their way, but she did not move. After
they had travelled three miles they unloaded the sled, came back for
her, and by main strength put her on the sled again.

In the excess of their own misery they were callous to the suffering of
their animals. Hal’s theory, which he practised on others, was that one
must get hardened. He had started out preaching it to his sister and
brother-in-law. Failing there, he hammered it into the dogs with a
club. At the Five Fingers the dog-food gave out, and a toothless old
squaw offered to trade them a few pounds of frozen horse-hide for the
Colt’s revolver that kept the big hunting-knife company at Hal’s hip. A
poor substitute for food was this hide, just as it had been stripped
from the starved horses of the cattlemen six months back. In its frozen
state it was more like strips of galvanized iron, and when a dog
wrestled it into his stomach it thawed into thin and innutritious
leathery strings and into a mass of short hair, irritating and
indigestible.

And through it all Buck staggered along at the head of the team as in a
nightmare. He pulled when he could; when he could no longer pull, he
fell down and remained down till blows from whip or club drove him to
his feet again. All the stiffness and gloss had gone out of his
beautiful furry coat. The hair hung down, limp and draggled, or matted
with dried blood where Hal’s club had bruised him. His muscles had
wasted away to knotty strings, and the flesh pads had disappeared, so
that each rib and every bone in his frame were outlined cleanly through
the loose hide that was wrinkled in folds of emptiness. It was
heartbreaking, only Buck’s heart was unbreakable. The man in the red
sweater had proved that.

As it was with Buck, so was it with his mates. They were perambulating
skeletons. There were seven all together, including him. In their very
great misery they had become insensible to the bite of the lash or the
bruise of the club. The pain of the beating was dull and distant, just
as the things their eyes saw and their ears heard seemed dull and
distant. They were not half living, or quarter living. They were simply
so many bags of bones in which sparks of life fluttered faintly. When a
halt was made, they dropped down in the traces like dead dogs, and the
spark dimmed and paled and seemed to go out. And when the club or whip
fell upon them, the spark fluttered feebly up, and they tottered to
their feet and staggered on.

There came a day when Billee, the good-natured, fell and could not
rise. Hal had traded off his revolver, so he took the axe and knocked
Billee on the head as he lay in the traces, then cut the carcass out of
the harness and dragged it to one side. Buck saw, and his mates saw,
and they knew that this thing was very close to them. On the next day
Koona went, and but five of them remained: Joe, too far gone to be
malignant; Pike, crippled and limping, only half conscious and not
conscious enough longer to malinger; Sol-leks, the one-eyed, still
faithful to the toil of trace and trail, and mournful in that he had so
little strength with which to pull; Teek, who had not travelled so far
that winter and who was now beaten more than the others because he was
fresher; and Buck, still at the head of the team, but no longer
enforcing discipline or striving to enforce it, blind with weakness
half the time and keeping the trail by the loom of it and by the dim
feel of his feet.

It was beautiful spring weather, but neither dogs nor humans were aware
of it. Each day the sun rose earlier and set later. It was dawn by
three in the morning, and twilight lingered till nine at night. The
whole long day was a blaze of sunshine. The ghostly winter silence had
given way to the great spring murmur of awakening life. This murmur
arose from all the land, fraught with the joy of living. It came from
the things that lived and moved again, things which had been as dead
and which had not moved during the long months of frost. The sap was
rising in the pines. The willows and aspens were bursting out in young
buds. Shrubs and vines were putting on fresh garbs of green. Crickets
sang in the nights, and in the days all manner of creeping, crawling
things rustled forth into the sun. Partridges and woodpeckers were
booming and knocking in the forest. Squirrels were chattering, birds
singing, and overhead honked the wild-fowl driving up from the south in
cunning wedges that split the air.

From every hill slope came the trickle of running water, the music of
unseen fountains. All things were thawing, bending, snapping. The Yukon
was straining to break loose the ice that bound it down. It ate away
from beneath; the sun ate from above. Air-holes formed, fissures sprang
and spread apart, while thin sections of ice fell through bodily into
the river. And amid all this bursting, rending, throbbing of awakening
life, under the blazing sun and through the soft-sighing breezes, like
wayfarers to death, staggered the two men, the woman, and the huskies.

With the dogs falling, Mercedes weeping and riding, Hal swearing
innocuously, and Charles’s eyes wistfully watering, they staggered into
John Thornton’s camp at the mouth of White River. When they halted, the
dogs dropped down as though they had all been struck dead. Mercedes
dried her eyes and looked at John Thornton. Charles sat down on a log
to rest. He sat down very slowly and painstakingly what of his great
stiffness. Hal did the talking. John Thornton was whittling the last
touches on an axe-handle he had made from a stick of birch. He whittled
and listened, gave monosyllabic replies, and, when it was asked, terse
advice. He knew the breed, and he gave his advice in the certainty that
it would not be followed.

“They told us up above that the bottom was dropping out of the trail
and that the best thing for us to do was to lay over,” Hal said in
response to Thornton’s warning to take no more chances on the rotten
ice. “They told us we couldn’t make White River, and here we are.” This
last with a sneering ring of triumph in it.

“And they told you true,” John Thornton answered. “The bottom’s likely
to drop out at any moment. Only fools, with the blind luck of fools,
could have made it. I tell you straight, I wouldn’t risk my carcass on
that ice for all the gold in Alaska.”

“That’s because you’re not a fool, I suppose,” said Hal. “All the same,
we’ll go on to Dawson.” He uncoiled his whip. “Get up there, Buck! Hi!
Get up there! Mush on!”

Thornton went on whittling. It was idle, he knew, to get between a fool
and his folly; while two or three fools more or less would not alter
the scheme of things.

But the team did not get up at the command. It had long since passed
into the stage where blows were required to rouse it. The whip flashed
out, here and there, on its merciless errands. John Thornton compressed
his lips. Sol-leks was the first to crawl to his feet. Teek followed.
Joe came next, yelping with pain. Pike made painful efforts. Twice he
fell over, when half up, and on the third attempt managed to rise. Buck
made no effort. He lay quietly where he had fallen. The lash bit into
him again and again, but he neither whined nor struggled. Several times
Thornton started, as though to speak, but changed his mind. A moisture
came into his eyes, and, as the whipping continued, he arose and walked
irresolutely up and down.

This was the first time Buck had failed, in itself a sufficient reason
to drive Hal into a rage. He exchanged the whip for the customary club.
Buck refused to move under the rain of heavier blows which now fell
upon him. Like his mates, he was barely able to get up, but, unlike
them, he had made up his mind not to get up. He had a vague feeling of
impending doom. This had been strong upon him when he pulled in to the
bank, and it had not departed from him. What of the thin and rotten ice
he had felt under his feet all day, it seemed that he sensed disaster
close at hand, out there ahead on the ice where his master was trying
to drive him. He refused to stir. So greatly had he suffered, and so
far gone was he, that the blows did not hurt much. And as they
continued to fall upon him, the spark of life within flickered and went
down. It was nearly out. He felt strangely numb. As though from a great
distance, he was aware that he was being beaten. The last sensations of
pain left him. He no longer felt anything, though very faintly he could
hear the impact of the club upon his body. But it was no longer his
body, it seemed so far away.

And then, suddenly, without warning, uttering a cry that was
inarticulate and more like the cry of an animal, John Thornton sprang
upon the man who wielded the club. Hal was hurled backward, as though
struck by a falling tree. Mercedes screamed. Charles looked on
wistfully, wiped his watery eyes, but did not get up because of his
stiffness.

John Thornton stood over Buck, struggling to control himself, too
convulsed with rage to speak.

“If you strike that dog again, I’ll kill you,” he at last managed to
say in a choking voice.

“It’s my dog,” Hal replied, wiping the blood from his mouth as he came
back. “Get out of my way, or I’ll fix you. I’m going to Dawson.”

Thornton stood between him and Buck, and evinced no intention of
getting out of the way. Hal drew his long hunting-knife. Mercedes
screamed, cried, laughed, and manifested the chaotic abandonment of
hysteria. Thornton rapped Hal’s knuckles with the axe-handle, knocking
the knife to the ground. He rapped his knuckles again as he tried to
pick it up. Then he stooped, picked it up himself, and with two strokes
cut Buck’s traces.

Hal had no fight left in him. Besides, his hands were full with his
sister, or his arms, rather; while Buck was too near dead to be of
further use in hauling the sled. A few minutes later they pulled out
from the bank and down the river. Buck heard them go and raised his
head to see, Pike was leading, Sol-leks was at the wheel, and between
were Joe and Teek. They were limping and staggering. Mercedes was
riding the loaded sled. Hal guided at the gee-pole, and Charles
stumbled along in the rear.

As Buck watched them, Thornton knelt beside him and with rough, kindly
hands searched for broken bones. By the time his search had disclosed
nothing more than many bruises and a state of terrible starvation, the
sled was a quarter of a mile away. Dog and man watched it crawling
along over the ice. Suddenly, they saw its back end drop down, as into
a rut, and the gee-pole, with Hal clinging to it, jerk into the air.
Mercedes’s scream came to their ears. They saw Charles turn and make
one step to run back, and then a whole section of ice give way and dogs
and humans disappear. A yawning hole was all that was to be seen. The
bottom had dropped out of the trail.

John Thornton and Buck looked at each other.

“You poor devil,” said John Thornton, and Buck licked his hand.



Chapter VI. For the Love of a Man

When John Thornton froze his feet in the previous December his partners
had made him comfortable and left him to get well, going on themselves
up the river to get out a raft of saw-logs for Dawson. He was still
limping slightly at the time he rescued Buck, but with the continued
warm weather even the slight limp left him. And here, lying by the
river bank through the long spring days, watching the running water,
listening lazily to the songs of birds and the hum of nature, Buck
slowly won back his strength.

A rest comes very good after one has travelled three thousand miles,
and it must be confessed that Buck waxed lazy as his wounds healed, his
muscles swelled out, and the flesh came back to cover his bones. For
that matter, they were all loafing,—Buck, John Thornton, and Skeet and
Nig,—waiting for the raft to come that was to carry them down to
Dawson. Skeet was a little Irish setter who early made friends with
Buck, who, in a dying condition, was unable to resent her first
advances. She had the doctor trait which some dogs possess; and as a
mother cat washes her kittens, so she washed and cleansed Buck’s
wounds. Regularly, each morning after he had finished his breakfast,
she performed her self-appointed task, till he came to look for her
ministrations as much as he did for Thornton’s. Nig, equally friendly,
though less demonstrative, was a huge black dog, half bloodhound and
half deerhound, with eyes that laughed and a boundless good nature.

To Buck’s surprise these dogs manifested no jealousy toward him. They
seemed to share the kindliness and largeness of John Thornton. As Buck
grew stronger they enticed him into all sorts of ridiculous games, in
which Thornton himself could not forbear to join; and in this fashion
Buck romped through his convalescence and into a new existence. Love,
genuine passionate love, was his for the first time. This he had never
experienced at Judge Miller’s down in the sun-kissed Santa Clara
Valley. With the Judge’s sons, hunting and tramping, it had been a
working partnership; with the Judge’s grandsons, a sort of pompous
guardianship; and with the Judge himself, a stately and dignified
friendship. But love that was feverish and burning, that was adoration,
that was madness, it had taken John Thornton to arouse.

This man had saved his life, which was something; but, further, he was
the ideal master. Other men saw to the welfare of their dogs from a
sense of duty and business expediency; he saw to the welfare of his as
if they were his own children, because he could not help it. And he saw
further. He never forgot a kindly greeting or a cheering word, and to
sit down for a long talk with them (“gas” he called it) was as much his
delight as theirs. He had a way of taking Buck’s head roughly between
his hands, and resting his own head upon Buck’s, of shaking him back
and forth, the while calling him ill names that to Buck were love
names. Buck knew no greater joy than that rough embrace and the sound
of murmured oaths, and at each jerk back and forth it seemed that his
heart would be shaken out of his body so great was its ecstasy. And
when, released, he sprang to his feet, his mouth laughing, his eyes
eloquent, his throat vibrant with unuttered sound, and in that fashion
remained without movement, John Thornton would reverently exclaim,
“God! you can all but speak!”

Buck had a trick of love expression that was akin to hurt. He would
often seize Thornton’s hand in his mouth and close so fiercely that the
flesh bore the impress of his teeth for some time afterward. And as
Buck understood the oaths to be love words, so the man understood this
feigned bite for a caress.

For the most part, however, Buck’s love was expressed in adoration.
While he went wild with happiness when Thornton touched him or spoke to
him, he did not seek these tokens. Unlike Skeet, who was wont to shove
her nose under Thornton’s hand and nudge and nudge till petted, or Nig,
who would stalk up and rest his great head on Thornton’s knee, Buck was
content to adore at a distance. He would lie by the hour, eager, alert,
at Thornton’s feet, looking up into his face, dwelling upon it,
studying it, following with keenest interest each fleeting expression,
every movement or change of feature. Or, as chance might have it, he
would lie farther away, to the side or rear, watching the outlines of
the man and the occasional movements of his body. And often, such was
the communion in which they lived, the strength of Buck’s gaze would
draw John Thornton’s head around, and he would return the gaze, without
speech, his heart shining out of his eyes as Buck’s heart shone out.

For a long time after his rescue, Buck did not like Thornton to get out
of his sight. From the moment he left the tent to when he entered it
again, Buck would follow at his heels. His transient masters since he
had come into the Northland had bred in him a fear that no master could
be permanent. He was afraid that Thornton would pass out of his life as
Perrault and François and the Scotch half-breed had passed out. Even in
the night, in his dreams, he was haunted by this fear. At such times he
would shake off sleep and creep through the chill to the flap of the
tent, where he would stand and listen to the sound of his master’s
breathing.

But in spite of this great love he bore John Thornton, which seemed to
bespeak the soft civilizing influence, the strain of the primitive,
which the Northland had aroused in him, remained alive and active.
Faithfulness and devotion, things born of fire and roof, were his; yet
he retained his wildness and wiliness. He was a thing of the wild, come
in from the wild to sit by John Thornton’s fire, rather than a dog of
the soft Southland stamped with the marks of generations of
civilization. Because of his very great love, he could not steal from
this man, but from any other man, in any other camp, he did not
hesitate an instant; while the cunning with which he stole enabled him
to escape detection.

His face and body were scored by the teeth of many dogs, and he fought
as fiercely as ever and more shrewdly. Skeet and Nig were too
good-natured for quarrelling,—besides, they belonged to John Thornton;
but the strange dog, no matter what the breed or valor, swiftly
acknowledged Buck’s supremacy or found himself struggling for life with
a terrible antagonist. And Buck was merciless. He had learned well the
law of club and fang, and he never forewent an advantage or drew back
from a foe he had started on the way to Death. He had lessoned from
Spitz, and from the chief fighting dogs of the police and mail, and
knew there was no middle course. He must master or be mastered; while
to show mercy was a weakness. Mercy did not exist in the primordial
life. It was misunderstood for fear, and such misunderstandings made
for death. Kill or be killed, eat or be eaten, was the law; and this
mandate, down out of the depths of Time, he obeyed.

He was older than the days he had seen and the breaths he had drawn. He
linked the past with the present, and the eternity behind him throbbed
through him in a mighty rhythm to which he swayed as the tides and
seasons swayed. He sat by John Thornton’s fire, a broad-breasted dog,
white-fanged and long-furred; but behind him were the shades of all
manner of dogs, half-wolves and wild wolves, urgent and prompting,
tasting the savor of the meat he ate, thirsting for the water he drank,
scenting the wind with him, listening with him and telling him the
sounds made by the wild life in the forest, dictating his moods,
directing his actions, lying down to sleep with him when he lay down,
and dreaming with him and beyond him and becoming themselves the stuff
of his dreams.

So peremptorily did these shades beckon him, that each day mankind and
the claims of mankind slipped farther from him. Deep in the forest a
call was sounding, and as often as he heard this call, mysteriously
thrilling and luring, he felt compelled to turn his back upon the fire
and the beaten earth around it, and to plunge into the forest, and on
and on, he knew not where or why; nor did he wonder where or why, the
call sounding imperiously, deep in the forest. But as often as he
gained the soft unbroken earth and the green shade, the love for John
Thornton drew him back to the fire again.

Thornton alone held him. The rest of mankind was as nothing. Chance
travellers might praise or pet him; but he was cold under it all, and
from a too demonstrative man he would get up and walk away. When
Thornton’s partners, Hans and Pete, arrived on the long-expected raft,
Buck refused to notice them till he learned they were close to
Thornton; after that he tolerated them in a passive sort of way,
accepting favors from them as though he favored them by accepting. They
were of the same large type as Thornton, living close to the earth,
thinking simply and seeing clearly; and ere they swung the raft into
the big eddy by the saw-mill at Dawson, they understood Buck and his
ways, and did not insist upon an intimacy such as obtained with Skeet
and Nig.

For Thornton, however, his love seemed to grow and grow. He, alone
among men, could put a pack upon Buck’s back in the summer travelling.
Nothing was too great for Buck to do, when Thornton commanded. One day
(they had grub-staked themselves from the proceeds of the raft and left
Dawson for the head-waters of the Tanana) the men and dogs were sitting
on the crest of a cliff which fell away, straight down, to naked
bed-rock three hundred feet below. John Thornton was sitting near the
edge, Buck at his shoulder. A thoughtless whim seized Thornton, and he
drew the attention of Hans and Pete to the experiment he had in mind.
“Jump, Buck!” he commanded, sweeping his arm out and over the chasm.
The next instant he was grappling with Buck on the extreme edge, while
Hans and Pete were dragging them back into safety.

“It’s uncanny,” Pete said, after it was over and they had caught their
speech.

Thornton shook his head. “No, it is splendid, and it is terrible, too.
Do you know, it sometimes makes me afraid.”

“I’m not hankering to be the man that lays hands on you while he’s
around,” Pete announced conclusively, nodding his head toward Buck.

“Py Jingo!” was Hans’s contribution. “Not mineself either.”

It was at Circle City, ere the year was out, that Pete’s apprehensions
were realized. “Black” Burton, a man evil-tempered and malicious, had
been picking a quarrel with a tenderfoot at the bar, when Thornton
stepped good-naturedly between. Buck, as was his custom, was lying in a
corner, head on paws, watching his master’s every action. Burton struck
out, without warning, straight from the shoulder. Thornton was sent
spinning, and saved himself from falling only by clutching the rail of
the bar.

Those who were looking on heard what was neither bark nor yelp, but a
something which is best described as a roar, and they saw Buck’s body
rise up in the air as he left the floor for Burton’s throat. The man
saved his life by instinctively throwing out his arm, but was hurled
backward to the floor with Buck on top of him. Buck loosed his teeth
from the flesh of the arm and drove in again for the throat. This time
the man succeeded only in partly blocking, and his throat was torn
open. Then the crowd was upon Buck, and he was driven off; but while a
surgeon checked the bleeding, he prowled up and down, growling
furiously, attempting to rush in, and being forced back by an array of
hostile clubs. A “miners’ meeting,” called on the spot, decided that
the dog had sufficient provocation, and Buck was discharged. But his
reputation was made, and from that day his name spread through every
camp in Alaska.

Later on, in the fall of the year, he saved John Thornton’s life in
quite another fashion. The three partners were lining a long and narrow
poling-boat down a bad stretch of rapids on the Forty-Mile Creek. Hans
and Pete moved along the bank, snubbing with a thin Manila rope from
tree to tree, while Thornton remained in the boat, helping its descent
by means of a pole, and shouting directions to the shore. Buck, on the
bank, worried and anxious, kept abreast of the boat, his eyes never off
his master.

At a particularly bad spot, where a ledge of barely submerged rocks
jutted out into the river, Hans cast off the rope, and, while Thornton
poled the boat out into the stream, ran down the bank with the end in
his hand to snub the boat when it had cleared the ledge. This it did,
and was flying down-stream in a current as swift as a mill-race, when
Hans checked it with the rope and checked too suddenly. The boat
flirted over and snubbed in to the bank bottom up, while Thornton,
flung sheer out of it, was carried down-stream toward the worst part of
the rapids, a stretch of wild water in which no swimmer could live.

Buck had sprung in on the instant; and at the end of three hundred
yards, amid a mad swirl of water, he overhauled Thornton. When he felt
him grasp his tail, Buck headed for the bank, swimming with all his
splendid strength. But the progress shoreward was slow; the progress
down-stream amazingly rapid. From below came the fatal roaring where
the wild current went wilder and was rent in shreds and spray by the
rocks which thrust through like the teeth of an enormous comb. The suck
of the water as it took the beginning of the last steep pitch was
frightful, and Thornton knew that the shore was impossible. He scraped
furiously over a rock, bruised across a second, and struck a third with
crushing force. He clutched its slippery top with both hands, releasing
Buck, and above the roar of the churning water shouted: “Go, Buck! Go!”

Buck could not hold his own, and swept on down-stream, struggling
desperately, but unable to win back. When he heard Thornton’s command
repeated, he partly reared out of the water, throwing his head high, as
though for a last look, then turned obediently toward the bank. He swam
powerfully and was dragged ashore by Pete and Hans at the very point
where swimming ceased to be possible and destruction began.

They knew that the time a man could cling to a slippery rock in the
face of that driving current was a matter of minutes, and they ran as
fast as they could up the bank to a point far above where Thornton was
hanging on. They attached the line with which they had been snubbing
the boat to Buck’s neck and shoulders, being careful that it should
neither strangle him nor impede his swimming, and launched him into the
stream. He struck out boldly, but not straight enough into the stream.
He discovered the mistake too late, when Thornton was abreast of him
and a bare half-dozen strokes away while he was being carried
helplessly past.

Hans promptly snubbed with the rope, as though Buck were a boat. The
rope thus tightening on him in the sweep of the current, he was jerked
under the surface, and under the surface he remained till his body
struck against the bank and he was hauled out. He was half drowned, and
Hans and Pete threw themselves upon him, pounding the breath into him
and the water out of him. He staggered to his feet and fell down. The
faint sound of Thornton’s voice came to them, and though they could not
make out the words of it, they knew that he was in his extremity. His
master’s voice acted on Buck like an electric shock, He sprang to his
feet and ran up the bank ahead of the men to the point of his previous
departure.

Again the rope was attached and he was launched, and again he struck
out, but this time straight into the stream. He had miscalculated once,
but he would not be guilty of it a second time. Hans paid out the rope,
permitting no slack, while Pete kept it clear of coils. Buck held on
till he was on a line straight above Thornton; then he turned, and with
the speed of an express train headed down upon him. Thornton saw him
coming, and, as Buck struck him like a battering ram, with the whole
force of the current behind him, he reached up and closed with both
arms around the shaggy neck. Hans snubbed the rope around the tree, and
Buck and Thornton were jerked under the water. Strangling, suffocating,
sometimes one uppermost and sometimes the other, dragging over the
jagged bottom, smashing against rocks and snags, they veered in to the
bank.

Thornton came to, belly downward and being violently propelled back and
forth across a drift log by Hans and Pete. His first glance was for
Buck, over whose limp and apparently lifeless body Nig was setting up a
howl, while Skeet was licking the wet face and closed eyes. Thornton
was himself bruised and battered, and he went carefully over Buck’s
body, when he had been brought around, finding three broken ribs.

“That settles it,” he announced. “We camp right here.” And camp they
did, till Buck’s ribs knitted and he was able to travel.

That winter, at Dawson, Buck performed another exploit, not so heroic,
perhaps, but one that put his name many notches higher on the
totem-pole of Alaskan fame. This exploit was particularly gratifying to
the three men; for they stood in need of the outfit which it furnished,
and were enabled to make a long-desired trip into the virgin East,
where miners had not yet appeared. It was brought about by a
conversation in the Eldorado Saloon, in which men waxed boastful of
their favorite dogs. Buck, because of his record, was the target for
these men, and Thornton was driven stoutly to defend him. At the end of
half an hour one man stated that his dog could start a sled with five
hundred pounds and walk off with it; a second bragged six hundred for
his dog; and a third, seven hundred.

“Pooh! pooh!” said John Thornton; “Buck can start a thousand pounds.”

“And break it out? and walk off with it for a hundred yards?” demanded
Matthewson, a Bonanza King, he of the seven hundred vaunt.

“And break it out, and walk off with it for a hundred yards,” John
Thornton said coolly.

“Well,” Matthewson said, slowly and deliberately, so that all could
hear, “I’ve got a thousand dollars that says he can’t. And there it
is.” So saying, he slammed a sack of gold dust of the size of a bologna
sausage down upon the bar.

Nobody spoke. Thornton’s bluff, if bluff it was, had been called. He
could feel a flush of warm blood creeping up his face. His tongue had
tricked him. He did not know whether Buck could start a thousand
pounds. Half a ton! The enormousness of it appalled him. He had great
faith in Buck’s strength and had often thought him capable of starting
such a load; but never, as now, had he faced the possibility of it, the
eyes of a dozen men fixed upon him, silent and waiting. Further, he had
no thousand dollars; nor had Hans or Pete.

“I’ve got a sled standing outside now, with twenty fiftypound sacks of
flour on it,” Matthewson went on with brutal directness; “so don’t let
that hinder you.”

Thornton did not reply. He did not know what to say. He glanced from
face to face in the absent way of a man who has lost the power of
thought and is seeking somewhere to find the thing that will start it
going again. The face of Jim O’Brien, a Mastodon King and old-time
comrade, caught his eyes. It was as a cue to him, seeming to rouse him
to do what he would never have dreamed of doing.

“Can you lend me a thousand?” he asked, almost in a whisper.

“Sure,” answered O’Brien, thumping down a plethoric sack by the side of
Matthewson’s. “Though it’s little faith I’m having, John, that the
beast can do the trick.”

The Eldorado emptied its occupants into the street to see the test. The
tables were deserted, and the dealers and gamekeepers came forth to see
the outcome of the wager and to lay odds. Several hundred men, furred
and mittened, banked around the sled within easy distance. Matthewson’s
sled, loaded with a thousand pounds of flour, had been standing for a
couple of hours, and in the intense cold (it was sixty below zero) the
runners had frozen fast to the hard-packed snow. Men offered odds of
two to one that Buck could not budge the sled. A quibble arose
concerning the phrase “break out.” O’Brien contended it was Thornton’s
privilege to knock the runners loose, leaving Buck to “break it out”
from a dead standstill. Matthewson insisted that the phrase included
breaking the runners from the frozen grip of the snow. A majority of
the men who had witnessed the making of the bet decided in his favor,
whereat the odds went up to three to one against Buck.

There were no takers. Not a man believed him capable of the feat.
Thornton had been hurried into the wager, heavy with doubt; and now
that he looked at the sled itself, the concrete fact, with the regular
team of ten dogs curled up in the snow before it, the more impossible
the task appeared. Matthewson waxed jubilant.

“Three to one!” he proclaimed. “I’ll lay you another thousand at that
figure, Thornton. What d’ye say?”

Thornton’s doubt was strong in his face, but his fighting spirit was
aroused—the fighting spirit that soars above odds, fails to recognize
the impossible, and is deaf to all save the clamor for battle. He
called Hans and Pete to him. Their sacks were slim, and with his own
the three partners could rake together only two hundred dollars. In the
ebb of their fortunes, this sum was their total capital; yet they laid
it unhesitatingly against Matthewson’s six hundred.

The team of ten dogs was unhitched, and Buck, with his own harness, was
put into the sled. He had caught the contagion of the excitement, and
he felt that in some way he must do a great thing for John Thornton.
Murmurs of admiration at his splendid appearance went up. He was in
perfect condition, without an ounce of superfluous flesh, and the one
hundred and fifty pounds that he weighed were so many pounds of grit
and virility. His furry coat shone with the sheen of silk. Down the
neck and across the shoulders, his mane, in repose as it was, half
bristled and seemed to lift with every movement, as though excess of
vigor made each particular hair alive and active. The great breast and
heavy fore legs were no more than in proportion with the rest of the
body, where the muscles showed in tight rolls underneath the skin. Men
felt these muscles and proclaimed them hard as iron, and the odds went
down to two to one.

“Gad, sir! Gad, sir!” stuttered a member of the latest dynasty, a king
of the Skookum Benches. “I offer you eight hundred for him, sir, before
the test, sir; eight hundred just as he stands.”

Thornton shook his head and stepped to Buck’s side.

“You must stand off from him,” Matthewson protested. “Free play and
plenty of room.”

The crowd fell silent; only could be heard the voices of the gamblers
vainly offering two to one. Everybody acknowledged Buck a magnificent
animal, but twenty fifty-pound sacks of flour bulked too large in their
eyes for them to loosen their pouch-strings.

Thornton knelt down by Buck’s side. He took his head in his two hands
and rested cheek on cheek. He did not playfully shake him, as was his
wont, or murmur soft love curses; but he whispered in his ear. “As you
love me, Buck. As you love me,” was what he whispered. Buck whined with
suppressed eagerness.

The crowd was watching curiously. The affair was growing mysterious. It
seemed like a conjuration. As Thornton got to his feet, Buck seized his
mittened hand between his jaws, pressing in with his teeth and
releasing slowly, half-reluctantly. It was the answer, in terms, not of
speech, but of love. Thornton stepped well back.

“Now, Buck,” he said.

Buck tightened the traces, then slacked them for a matter of several
inches. It was the way he had learned.

“Gee!” Thornton’s voice rang out, sharp in the tense silence.

Buck swung to the right, ending the movement in a plunge that took up
the slack and with a sudden jerk arrested his one hundred and fifty
pounds. The load quivered, and from under the runners arose a crisp
crackling.

“Haw!” Thornton commanded.

Buck duplicated the manœuvre, this time to the left. The crackling
turned into a snapping, the sled pivoting and the runners slipping and
grating several inches to the side. The sled was broken out. Men were
holding their breaths, intensely unconscious of the fact.

“Now, MUSH!”

Thornton’s command cracked out like a pistol-shot. Buck threw himself
forward, tightening the traces with a jarring lunge. His whole body was
gathered compactly together in the tremendous effort, the muscles
writhing and knotting like live things under the silky fur. His great
chest was low to the ground, his head forward and down, while his feet
were flying like mad, the claws scarring the hard-packed snow in
parallel grooves. The sled swayed and trembled, half-started forward.
One of his feet slipped, and one man groaned aloud. Then the sled
lurched ahead in what appeared a rapid succession of jerks, though it
never really came to a dead stop again...half an inch...an inch... two
inches... The jerks perceptibly diminished; as the sled gained
momentum, he caught them up, till it was moving steadily along.

Men gasped and began to breathe again, unaware that for a moment they
had ceased to breathe. Thornton was running behind, encouraging Buck
with short, cheery words. The distance had been measured off, and as he
neared the pile of firewood which marked the end of the hundred yards,
a cheer began to grow and grow, which burst into a roar as he passed
the firewood and halted at command. Every man was tearing himself
loose, even Matthewson. Hats and mittens were flying in the air. Men
were shaking hands, it did not matter with whom, and bubbling over in a
general incoherent babel.

But Thornton fell on his knees beside Buck. Head was against head, and
he was shaking him back and forth. Those who hurried up heard him
cursing Buck, and he cursed him long and fervently, and softly and
lovingly.

“Gad, sir! Gad, sir!” spluttered the Skookum Bench king. “I’ll give you
a thousand for him, sir, a thousand, sir—twelve hundred, sir.”

Thornton rose to his feet. His eyes were wet. The tears were streaming
frankly down his cheeks. “Sir,” he said to the Skookum Bench king, “no,
sir. You can go to hell, sir. It’s the best I can do for you, sir.”

Buck seized Thornton’s hand in his teeth. Thornton shook him back and
forth. As though animated by a common impulse, the onlookers drew back
to a respectful distance; nor were they again indiscreet enough to
interrupt.



Chapter VII. The Sounding of the Call

When Buck earned sixteen hundred dollars in five minutes for John
Thornton, he made it possible for his master to pay off certain debts
and to journey with his partners into the East after a fabled lost
mine, the history of which was as old as the history of the country.
Many men had sought it; few had found it; and more than a few there
were who had never returned from the quest. This lost mine was steeped
in tragedy and shrouded in mystery. No one knew of the first man. The
oldest tradition stopped before it got back to him. From the beginning
there had been an ancient and ramshackle cabin. Dying men had sworn to
it, and to the mine the site of which it marked, clinching their
testimony with nuggets that were unlike any known grade of gold in the
Northland.

But no living man had looted this treasure house, and the dead were
dead; wherefore John Thornton and Pete and Hans, with Buck and half a
dozen other dogs, faced into the East on an unknown trail to achieve
where men and dogs as good as themselves had failed. They sledded
seventy miles up the Yukon, swung to the left into the Stewart River,
passed the Mayo and the McQuestion, and held on until the Stewart
itself became a streamlet, threading the upstanding peaks which marked
the backbone of the continent.

John Thornton asked little of man or nature. He was unafraid of the
wild. With a handful of salt and a rifle he could plunge into the
wilderness and fare wherever he pleased and as long as he pleased.
Being in no haste, Indian fashion, he hunted his dinner in the course
of the day’s travel; and if he failed to find it, like the Indian, he
kept on travelling, secure in the knowledge that sooner or later he
would come to it. So, on this great journey into the East, straight
meat was the bill of fare, ammunition and tools principally made up the
load on the sled, and the time-card was drawn upon the limitless
future.

To Buck it was boundless delight, this hunting, fishing, and indefinite
wandering through strange places. For weeks at a time they would hold
on steadily, day after day; and for weeks upon end they would camp,
here and there, the dogs loafing and the men burning holes through
frozen muck and gravel and washing countless pans of dirt by the heat
of the fire. Sometimes they went hungry, sometimes they feasted
riotously, all according to the abundance of game and the fortune of
hunting. Summer arrived, and dogs and men packed on their backs, rafted
across blue mountain lakes, and descended or ascended unknown rivers in
slender boats whipsawed from the standing forest.

The months came and went, and back and forth they twisted through the
uncharted vastness, where no men were and yet where men had been if the
Lost Cabin were true. They went across divides in summer blizzards,
shivered under the midnight sun on naked mountains between the timber
line and the eternal snows, dropped into summer valleys amid swarming
gnats and flies, and in the shadows of glaciers picked strawberries and
flowers as ripe and fair as any the Southland could boast. In the fall
of the year they penetrated a weird lake country, sad and silent, where
wildfowl had been, but where then there was no life nor sign of
life—only the blowing of chill winds, the forming of ice in sheltered
places, and the melancholy rippling of waves on lonely beaches.

And through another winter they wandered on the obliterated trails of
men who had gone before. Once, they came upon a path blazed through the
forest, an ancient path, and the Lost Cabin seemed very near. But the
path began nowhere and ended nowhere, and it remained mystery, as the
man who made it and the reason he made it remained mystery. Another
time they chanced upon the time-graven wreckage of a hunting lodge, and
amid the shreds of rotted blankets John Thornton found a long-barrelled
flint-lock. He knew it for a Hudson Bay Company gun of the young days
in the Northwest, when such a gun was worth its height in beaver skins
packed flat, And that was all—no hint as to the man who in an early day
had reared the lodge and left the gun among the blankets.

Spring came on once more, and at the end of all their wandering they
found, not the Lost Cabin, but a shallow placer in a broad valley where
the gold showed like yellow butter across the bottom of the
washing-pan. They sought no farther. Each day they worked earned them
thousands of dollars in clean dust and nuggets, and they worked every
day. The gold was sacked in moose-hide bags, fifty pounds to the bag,
and piled like so much firewood outside the spruce-bough lodge. Like
giants they toiled, days flashing on the heels of days like dreams as
they heaped the treasure up.

There was nothing for the dogs to do, save the hauling in of meat now
and again that Thornton killed, and Buck spent long hours musing by the
fire. The vision of the short-legged hairy man came to him more
frequently, now that there was little work to be done; and often,
blinking by the fire, Buck wandered with him in that other world which
he remembered.

The salient thing of this other world seemed fear. When he watched the
hairy man sleeping by the fire, head between his knees and hands
clasped above, Buck saw that he slept restlessly, with many starts and
awakenings, at which times he would peer fearfully into the darkness
and fling more wood upon the fire. Did they walk by the beach of a sea,
where the hairy man gathered shellfish and ate them as he gathered, it
was with eyes that roved everywhere for hidden danger and with legs
prepared to run like the wind at its first appearance. Through the
forest they crept noiselessly, Buck at the hairy man’s heels; and they
were alert and vigilant, the pair of them, ears twitching and moving
and nostrils quivering, for the man heard and smelled as keenly as
Buck. The hairy man could spring up into the trees and travel ahead as
fast as on the ground, swinging by the arms from limb to limb,
sometimes a dozen feet apart, letting go and catching, never falling,
never missing his grip. In fact, he seemed as much at home among the
trees as on the ground; and Buck had memories of nights of vigil spent
beneath trees wherein the hairy man roosted, holding on tightly as he
slept.

And closely akin to the visions of the hairy man was the call still
sounding in the depths of the forest. It filled him with a great unrest
and strange desires. It caused him to feel a vague, sweet gladness, and
he was aware of wild yearnings and stirrings for he knew not what.
Sometimes he pursued the call into the forest, looking for it as though
it were a tangible thing, barking softly or defiantly, as the mood
might dictate. He would thrust his nose into the cool wood moss, or
into the black soil where long grasses grew, and snort with joy at the
fat earth smells; or he would crouch for hours, as if in concealment,
behind fungus-covered trunks of fallen trees, wide-eyed and wide-eared
to all that moved and sounded about him. It might be, lying thus, that
he hoped to surprise this call he could not understand. But he did not
know why he did these various things. He was impelled to do them, and
did not reason about them at all.

Irresistible impulses seized him. He would be lying in camp, dozing
lazily in the heat of the day, when suddenly his head would lift and
his ears cock up, intent and listening, and he would spring to his feet
and dash away, and on and on, for hours, through the forest aisles and
across the open spaces where the niggerheads bunched. He loved to run
down dry watercourses, and to creep and spy upon the bird life in the
woods. For a day at a time he would lie in the underbrush where he
could watch the partridges drumming and strutting up and down. But
especially he loved to run in the dim twilight of the summer midnights,
listening to the subdued and sleepy murmurs of the forest, reading
signs and sounds as man may read a book, and seeking for the mysterious
something that called—called, waking or sleeping, at all times, for him
to come.

One night he sprang from sleep with a start, eager-eyed, nostrils
quivering and scenting, his mane bristling in recurrent waves. From the
forest came the call (or one note of it, for the call was many noted),
distinct and definite as never before,—a long-drawn howl, like, yet
unlike, any noise made by husky dog. And he knew it, in the old
familiar way, as a sound heard before. He sprang through the sleeping
camp and in swift silence dashed through the woods. As he drew closer
to the cry he went more slowly, with caution in every movement, till he
came to an open place among the trees, and looking out saw, erect on
haunches, with nose pointed to the sky, a long, lean, timber wolf.

He had made no noise, yet it ceased from its howling and tried to sense
his presence. Buck stalked into the open, half crouching, body gathered
compactly together, tail straight and stiff, feet falling with unwonted
care. Every movement advertised commingled threatening and overture of
friendliness. It was the menacing truce that marks the meeting of wild
beasts that prey. But the wolf fled at sight of him. He followed, with
wild leapings, in a frenzy to overtake. He ran him into a blind
channel, in the bed of the creek where a timber jam barred the way. The
wolf whirled about, pivoting on his hind legs after the fashion of Joe
and of all cornered husky dogs, snarling and bristling, clipping his
teeth together in a continuous and rapid succession of snaps.

Buck did not attack, but circled him about and hedged him in with
friendly advances. The wolf was suspicious and afraid; for Buck made
three of him in weight, while his head barely reached Buck’s shoulder.
Watching his chance, he darted away, and the chase was resumed. Time
and again he was cornered, and the thing repeated, though he was in
poor condition, or Buck could not so easily have overtaken him. He
would run till Buck’s head was even with his flank, when he would whirl
around at bay, only to dash away again at the first opportunity.

But in the end Buck’s pertinacity was rewarded; for the wolf, finding
that no harm was intended, finally sniffed noses with him. Then they
became friendly, and played about in the nervous, half-coy way with
which fierce beasts belie their fierceness. After some time of this the
wolf started off at an easy lope in a manner that plainly showed he was
going somewhere. He made it clear to Buck that he was to come, and they
ran side by side through the sombre twilight, straight up the creek
bed, into the gorge from which it issued, and across the bleak divide
where it took its rise.

On the opposite slope of the watershed they came down into a level
country where were great stretches of forest and many streams, and
through these great stretches they ran steadily, hour after hour, the
sun rising higher and the day growing warmer. Buck was wildly glad. He
knew he was at last answering the call, running by the side of his wood
brother toward the place from where the call surely came. Old memories
were coming upon him fast, and he was stirring to them as of old he
stirred to the realities of which they were the shadows. He had done
this thing before, somewhere in that other and dimly remembered world,
and he was doing it again, now, running free in the open, the unpacked
earth underfoot, the wide sky overhead.

They stopped by a running stream to drink, and, stopping, Buck
remembered John Thornton. He sat down. The wolf started on toward the
place from where the call surely came, then returned to him, sniffing
noses and making actions as though to encourage him. But Buck turned
about and started slowly on the back track. For the better part of an
hour the wild brother ran by his side, whining softly. Then he sat
down, pointed his nose upward, and howled. It was a mournful howl, and
as Buck held steadily on his way he heard it grow faint and fainter
until it was lost in the distance.

John Thornton was eating dinner when Buck dashed into camp and sprang
upon him in a frenzy of affection, overturning him, scrambling upon
him, licking his face, biting his hand—“playing the general tom-fool,”
as John Thornton characterized it, the while he shook Buck back and
forth and cursed him lovingly.

For two days and nights Buck never left camp, never let Thornton out of
his sight. He followed him about at his work, watched him while he ate,
saw him into his blankets at night and out of them in the morning. But
after two days the call in the forest began to sound more imperiously
than ever. Buck’s restlessness came back on him, and he was haunted by
recollections of the wild brother, and of the smiling land beyond the
divide and the run side by side through the wide forest stretches. Once
again he took to wandering in the woods, but the wild brother came no
more; and though he listened through long vigils, the mournful howl was
never raised.

He began to sleep out at night, staying away from camp for days at a
time; and once he crossed the divide at the head of the creek and went
down into the land of timber and streams. There he wandered for a week,
seeking vainly for fresh sign of the wild brother, killing his meat as
he travelled and travelling with the long, easy lope that seems never
to tire. He fished for salmon in a broad stream that emptied somewhere
into the sea, and by this stream he killed a large black bear, blinded
by the mosquitoes while likewise fishing, and raging through the forest
helpless and terrible. Even so, it was a hard fight, and it aroused the
last latent remnants of Buck’s ferocity. And two days later, when he
returned to his kill and found a dozen wolverenes quarrelling over the
spoil, he scattered them like chaff; and those that fled left two
behind who would quarrel no more.

The blood-longing became stronger than ever before. He was a killer, a
thing that preyed, living on the things that lived, unaided, alone, by
virtue of his own strength and prowess, surviving triumphantly in a
hostile environment where only the strong survived. Because of all this
he became possessed of a great pride in himself, which communicated
itself like a contagion to his physical being. It advertised itself in
all his movements, was apparent in the play of every muscle, spoke
plainly as speech in the way he carried himself, and made his glorious
furry coat if anything more glorious. But for the stray brown on his
muzzle and above his eyes, and for the splash of white hair that ran
midmost down his chest, he might well have been mistaken for a gigantic
wolf, larger than the largest of the breed. From his St. Bernard father
he had inherited size and weight, but it was his shepherd mother who
had given shape to that size and weight. His muzzle was the long wolf
muzzle, save that it was larger than the muzzle of any wolf; and his
head, somewhat broader, was the wolf head on a massive scale.

His cunning was wolf cunning, and wild cunning; his intelligence,
shepherd intelligence and St. Bernard intelligence; and all this, plus
an experience gained in the fiercest of schools, made him as formidable
a creature as any that roamed the wild. A carnivorous animal living on
a straight meat diet, he was in full flower, at the high tide of his
life, overspilling with vigor and virility. When Thornton passed a
caressing hand along his back, a snapping and crackling followed the
hand, each hair discharging its pent magnetism at the contact. Every
part, brain and body, nerve tissue and fibre, was keyed to the most
exquisite pitch; and between all the parts there was a perfect
equilibrium or adjustment. To sights and sounds and events which
required action, he responded with lightning-like rapidity. Quickly as
a husky dog could leap to defend from attack or to attack, he could
leap twice as quickly. He saw the movement, or heard sound, and
responded in less time than another dog required to compass the mere
seeing or hearing. He perceived and determined and responded in the
same instant. In point of fact the three actions of perceiving,
determining, and responding were sequential; but so infinitesimal were
the intervals of time between them that they appeared simultaneous. His
muscles were surcharged with vitality, and snapped into play sharply,
like steel springs. Life streamed through him in splendid flood, glad
and rampant, until it seemed that it would burst him asunder in sheer
ecstasy and pour forth generously over the world.

“Never was there such a dog,” said John Thornton one day, as the
partners watched Buck marching out of camp.

“When he was made, the mould was broke,” said Pete.

“Py jingo! I t’ink so mineself,” Hans affirmed.

They saw him marching out of camp, but they did not see the instant and
terrible transformation which took place as soon as he was within the
secrecy of the forest. He no longer marched. At once he became a thing
of the wild, stealing along softly, cat-footed, a passing shadow that
appeared and disappeared among the shadows. He knew how to take
advantage of every cover, to crawl on his belly like a snake, and like
a snake to leap and strike. He could take a ptarmigan from its nest,
kill a rabbit as it slept, and snap in mid air the little chipmunks
fleeing a second too late for the trees. Fish, in open pools, were not
too quick for him; nor were beaver, mending their dams, too wary. He
killed to eat, not from wantonness; but he preferred to eat what he
killed himself. So a lurking humor ran through his deeds, and it was
his delight to steal upon the squirrels, and, when he all but had them,
to let them go, chattering in mortal fear to the treetops.

As the fall of the year came on, the moose appeared in greater
abundance, moving slowly down to meet the winter in the lower and less
rigorous valleys. Buck had already dragged down a stray part-grown
calf; but he wished strongly for larger and more formidable quarry, and
he came upon it one day on the divide at the head of the creek. A band
of twenty moose had crossed over from the land of streams and timber,
and chief among them was a great bull. He was in a savage temper, and,
standing over six feet from the ground, was as formidable an antagonist
as even Buck could desire. Back and forth the bull tossed his great
palmated antlers, branching to fourteen points and embracing seven feet
within the tips. His small eyes burned with a vicious and bitter light,
while he roared with fury at sight of Buck.

From the bull’s side, just forward of the flank, protruded a feathered
arrow-end, which accounted for his savageness. Guided by that instinct
which came from the old hunting days of the primordial world, Buck
proceeded to cut the bull out from the herd. It was no slight task. He
would bark and dance about in front of the bull, just out of reach of
the great antlers and of the terrible splay hoofs which could have
stamped his life out with a single blow. Unable to turn his back on the
fanged danger and go on, the bull would be driven into paroxysms of
rage. At such moments he charged Buck, who retreated craftily, luring
him on by a simulated inability to escape. But when he was thus
separated from his fellows, two or three of the younger bulls would
charge back upon Buck and enable the wounded bull to rejoin the herd.

There is a patience of the wild—dogged, tireless, persistent as life
itself—that holds motionless for endless hours the spider in its web,
the snake in its coils, the panther in its ambuscade; this patience
belongs peculiarly to life when it hunts its living food; and it
belonged to Buck as he clung to the flank of the herd, retarding its
march, irritating the young bulls, worrying the cows with their
half-grown calves, and driving the wounded bull mad with helpless rage.
For half a day this continued. Buck multiplied himself, attacking from
all sides, enveloping the herd in a whirlwind of menace, cutting out
his victim as fast as it could rejoin its mates, wearing out the
patience of creatures preyed upon, which is a lesser patience than that
of creatures preying.

As the day wore along and the sun dropped to its bed in the northwest
(the darkness had come back and the fall nights were six hours long),
the young bulls retraced their steps more and more reluctantly to the
aid of their beset leader. The down-coming winter was harrying them on
to the lower levels, and it seemed they could never shake off this
tireless creature that held them back. Besides, it was not the life of
the herd, or of the young bulls, that was threatened. The life of only
one member was demanded, which was a remoter interest than their lives,
and in the end they were content to pay the toll.

As twilight fell the old bull stood with lowered head, watching his
mates—the cows he had known, the calves he had fathered, the bulls he
had mastered—as they shambled on at a rapid pace through the fading
light. He could not follow, for before his nose leaped the merciless
fanged terror that would not let him go. Three hundredweight more than
half a ton he weighed; he had lived a long, strong life, full of fight
and struggle, and at the end he faced death at the teeth of a creature
whose head did not reach beyond his great knuckled knees.

From then on, night and day, Buck never left his prey, never gave it a
moment’s rest, never permitted it to browse the leaves of trees or the
shoots of young birch and willow. Nor did he give the wounded bull
opportunity to slake his burning thirst in the slender trickling
streams they crossed. Often, in desperation, he burst into long
stretches of flight. At such times Buck did not attempt to stay him,
but loped easily at his heels, satisfied with the way the game was
played, lying down when the moose stood still, attacking him fiercely
when he strove to eat or drink.

The great head drooped more and more under its tree of horns, and the
shambling trot grew weak and weaker. He took to standing for long
periods, with nose to the ground and dejected ears dropped limply; and
Buck found more time in which to get water for himself and in which to
rest. At such moments, panting with red lolling tongue and with eyes
fixed upon the big bull, it appeared to Buck that a change was coming
over the face of things. He could feel a new stir in the land. As the
moose were coming into the land, other kinds of life were coming in.
Forest and stream and air seemed palpitant with their presence. The
news of it was borne in upon him, not by sight, or sound, or smell, but
by some other and subtler sense. He heard nothing, saw nothing, yet
knew that the land was somehow different; that through it strange
things were afoot and ranging; and he resolved to investigate after he
had finished the business in hand.

At last, at the end of the fourth day, he pulled the great moose down.
For a day and a night he remained by the kill, eating and sleeping,
turn and turn about. Then, rested, refreshed and strong, he turned his
face toward camp and John Thornton. He broke into the long easy lope,
and went on, hour after hour, never at loss for the tangled way,
heading straight home through strange country with a certitude of
direction that put man and his magnetic needle to shame.

As he held on he became more and more conscious of the new stir in the
land. There was life abroad in it different from the life which had
been there throughout the summer. No longer was this fact borne in upon
him in some subtle, mysterious way. The birds talked of it, the
squirrels chattered about it, the very breeze whispered of it. Several
times he stopped and drew in the fresh morning air in great sniffs,
reading a message which made him leap on with greater speed. He was
oppressed with a sense of calamity happening, if it were not calamity
already happened; and as he crossed the last watershed and dropped down
into the valley toward camp, he proceeded with greater caution.

Three miles away he came upon a fresh trail that sent his neck hair
rippling and bristling, It led straight toward camp and John Thornton.
Buck hurried on, swiftly and stealthily, every nerve straining and
tense, alert to the multitudinous details which told a story—all but
the end. His nose gave him a varying description of the passage of the
life on the heels of which he was travelling. He remarked the pregnant
silence of the forest. The bird life had flitted. The squirrels were in
hiding. One only he saw,—a sleek gray fellow, flattened against a gray
dead limb so that he seemed a part of it, a woody excrescence upon the
wood itself.

As Buck slid along with the obscureness of a gliding shadow, his nose
was jerked suddenly to the side as though a positive force had gripped
and pulled it. He followed the new scent into a thicket and found Nig.
He was lying on his side, dead where he had dragged himself, an arrow
protruding, head and feathers, from either side of his body.

A hundred yards farther on, Buck came upon one of the sled-dogs
Thornton had bought in Dawson. This dog was thrashing about in a
death-struggle, directly on the trail, and Buck passed around him
without stopping. From the camp came the faint sound of many voices,
rising and falling in a sing-song chant. Bellying forward to the edge
of the clearing, he found Hans, lying on his face, feathered with
arrows like a porcupine. At the same instant Buck peered out where the
spruce-bough lodge had been and saw what made his hair leap straight up
on his neck and shoulders. A gust of overpowering rage swept over him.
He did not know that he growled, but he growled aloud with a terrible
ferocity. For the last time in his life he allowed passion to usurp
cunning and reason, and it was because of his great love for John
Thornton that he lost his head.

The Yeehats were dancing about the wreckage of the spruce-bough lodge
when they heard a fearful roaring and saw rushing upon them an animal
the like of which they had never seen before. It was Buck, a live
hurricane of fury, hurling himself upon them in a frenzy to destroy. He
sprang at the foremost man (it was the chief of the Yeehats), ripping
the throat wide open till the rent jugular spouted a fountain of blood.
He did not pause to worry the victim, but ripped in passing, with the
next bound tearing wide the throat of a second man. There was no
withstanding him. He plunged about in their very midst, tearing,
rending, destroying, in constant and terrific motion which defied the
arrows they discharged at him. In fact, so inconceivably rapid were his
movements, and so closely were the Indians tangled together, that they
shot one another with the arrows; and one young hunter, hurling a spear
at Buck in mid air, drove it through the chest of another hunter with
such force that the point broke through the skin of the back and stood
out beyond. Then a panic seized the Yeehats, and they fled in terror to
the woods, proclaiming as they fled the advent of the Evil Spirit.

And truly Buck was the Fiend incarnate, raging at their heels and
dragging them down like deer as they raced through the trees. It was a
fateful day for the Yeehats. They scattered far and wide over the
country, and it was not till a week later that the last of the
survivors gathered together in a lower valley and counted their losses.
As for Buck, wearying of the pursuit, he returned to the desolated
camp. He found Pete where he had been killed in his blankets in the
first moment of surprise. Thornton’s desperate struggle was
fresh-written on the earth, and Buck scented every detail of it down to
the edge of a deep pool. By the edge, head and fore feet in the water,
lay Skeet, faithful to the last. The pool itself, muddy and discolored
from the sluice boxes, effectually hid what it contained, and it
contained John Thornton; for Buck followed his trace into the water,
from which no trace led away.

All day Buck brooded by the pool or roamed restlessly about the camp.
Death, as a cessation of movement, as a passing out and away from the
lives of the living, he knew, and he knew John Thornton was dead. It
left a great void in him, somewhat akin to hunger, but a void which
ached and ached, and which food could not fill, At times, when he
paused to contemplate the carcasses of the Yeehats, he forgot the pain
of it; and at such times he was aware of a great pride in himself,—a
pride greater than any he had yet experienced. He had killed man, the
noblest game of all, and he had killed in the face of the law of club
and fang. He sniffed the bodies curiously. They had died so easily. It
was harder to kill a husky dog than them. They were no match at all,
were it not for their arrows and spears and clubs. Thenceforward he
would be unafraid of them except when they bore in their hands their
arrows, spears, and clubs.

Night came on, and a full moon rose high over the trees into the sky,
lighting the land till it lay bathed in ghostly day. And with the
coming of the night, brooding and mourning by the pool, Buck became
alive to a stirring of the new life in the forest other than that which
the Yeehats had made, He stood up, listening and scenting. From far
away drifted a faint, sharp yelp, followed by a chorus of similar sharp
yelps. As the moments passed the yelps grew closer and louder. Again
Buck knew them as things heard in that other world which persisted in
his memory. He walked to the centre of the open space and listened. It
was the call, the many-noted call, sounding more luringly and
compellingly than ever before. And as never before, he was ready to
obey. John Thornton was dead. The last tie was broken. Man and the
claims of man no longer bound him.

Hunting their living meat, as the Yeehats were hunting it, on the
flanks of the migrating moose, the wolf pack had at last crossed over
from the land of streams and timber and invaded Buck’s valley. Into the
clearing where the moonlight streamed, they poured in a silvery flood;
and in the centre of the clearing stood Buck, motionless as a statue,
waiting their coming. They were awed, so still and large he stood, and
a moment’s pause fell, till the boldest one leaped straight for him.
Like a flash Buck struck, breaking the neck. Then he stood, without
movement, as before, the stricken wolf rolling in agony behind him.
Three others tried it in sharp succession; and one after the other they
drew back, streaming blood from slashed throats or shoulders.

This was sufficient to fling the whole pack forward, pell-mell, crowded
together, blocked and confused by its eagerness to pull down the prey.
Buck’s marvellous quickness and agility stood him in good stead.
Pivoting on his hind legs, and snapping and gashing, he was everywhere
at once, presenting a front which was apparently unbroken so swiftly
did he whirl and guard from side to side. But to prevent them from
getting behind him, he was forced back, down past the pool and into the
creek bed, till he brought up against a high gravel bank. He worked
along to a right angle in the bank which the men had made in the course
of mining, and in this angle he came to bay, protected on three sides
and with nothing to do but face the front.

And so well did he face it, that at the end of half an hour the wolves
drew back discomfited. The tongues of all were out and lolling, the
white fangs showing cruelly white in the moonlight. Some were lying
down with heads raised and ears pricked forward; others stood on their
feet, watching him; and still others were lapping water from the pool.
One wolf, long and lean and gray, advanced cautiously, in a friendly
manner, and Buck recognized the wild brother with whom he had run for a
night and a day. He was whining softly, and, as Buck whined, they
touched noses.

Then an old wolf, gaunt and battle-scarred, came forward. Buck writhed
his lips into the preliminary of a snarl, but sniffed noses with him,
Whereupon the old wolf sat down, pointed nose at the moon, and broke
out the long wolf howl. The others sat down and howled. And now the
call came to Buck in unmistakable accents. He, too, sat down and
howled. This over, he came out of his angle and the pack crowded around
him, sniffing in half-friendly, half-savage manner. The leaders lifted
the yelp of the pack and sprang away into the woods. The wolves swung
in behind, yelping in chorus. And Buck ran with them, side by side with
the wild brother, yelping as he ran.


And here may well end the story of Buck. The years were not many when
the Yeehats noted a change in the breed of timber wolves; for some were
seen with splashes of brown on head and muzzle, and with a rift of
white centring down the chest. But more remarkable than this, the
Yeehats tell of a Ghost Dog that runs at the head of the pack. They are
afraid of this Ghost Dog, for it has cunning greater than they,
stealing from their camps in fierce winters, robbing their traps,
slaying their dogs, and defying their bravest hunters.

Nay, the tale grows worse. Hunters there are who fail to return to the
camp, and hunters there have been whom their tribesmen found with
throats slashed cruelly open and with wolf prints about them in the
snow greater than the prints of any wolf. Each fall, when the Yeehats
follow the movement of the moose, there is a certain valley which they
never enter. And women there are who become sad when the word goes over
the fire of how the Evil Spirit came to select that valley for an
abiding-place.

In the summers there is one visitor, however, to that valley, of which
the Yeehats do not know. It is a great, gloriously coated wolf, like,
and yet unlike, all other wolves. He crosses alone from the smiling
timber land and comes down into an open space among the trees. Here a
yellow stream flows from rotted moose-hide sacks and sinks into the
ground, with long grasses growing through it and vegetable mould
overrunning it and hiding its yellow from the sun; and here he muses
for a time, howling once, long and mournfully, ere he departs.

But he is not always alone. When the long winter nights come on and the
wolves follow their meat into the lower valleys, he may be seen running
at the head of the pack through the pale moonlight or glimmering
borealis, leaping gigantic above his fellows, his great throat a-bellow
as he sings a song of the younger world, which is the song of the pack.

CHAPTER I—THE TRAIL OF THE MEAT

Dark spruce forest frowned on either side the frozen waterway.  The trees had been stripped by a recent wind of their white covering of frost, and they seemed to lean towards each other, black and ominous, in the fading light.  A vast silence reigned over the land.  The land itself was a desolation, lifeless, without movement, so lone and cold that the spirit of it was not even that of sadness.  There was a hint in it of laughter, but of a laughter more terrible than any sadness—a laughter that was mirthless as the smile of the sphinx, a laughter cold as the frost and partaking of the grimness of infallibility.  It was the masterful and incommunicable wisdom of eternity laughing at the futility of life and the effort of life.  It was the Wild, the savage, frozen-hearted Northland Wild.

But there was life, abroad in the land and defiant.  Down the frozen waterway toiled a string of wolfish dogs.  Their bristly fur was rimed with frost.  Their breath froze in the air as it left their mouths, spouting forth in spumes of vapour that settled upon the hair of their bodies and formed into crystals of frost.  Leather harness was on the dogs, and leather traces attached them to a sled which dragged along behind.  The sled was without runners.  It was made of stout birch-bark, and its full surface rested on the snow.  The front end of the sled was turned up, like a scroll, in order to force down and under the bore of soft snow that surged like a wave before it.  On the sled, securely lashed, was a long and narrow oblong box.  There were other things on the sled—blankets, an axe, and a coffee-pot and frying-pan; but prominent, occupying most of the space, was the long and narrow oblong box.

In advance of the dogs, on wide snowshoes, toiled a man.  At the rear of the sled toiled a second man.  On the sled, in the box, lay a third man whose toil was over,—a man whom the Wild had conquered and beaten down until he would never move nor struggle again.  It is not the way of the Wild to like movement.  Life is an offence to it, for life is movement; and the Wild aims always to destroy movement.  It freezes the water to prevent it running to the sea; it drives the sap out of the trees till they are frozen to their mighty hearts; and most ferociously and terribly of all does the Wild harry and crush into submission man—man who is the most restless of life, ever in revolt against the dictum that all movement must in the end come to the cessation of movement.

But at front and rear, unawed and indomitable, toiled the two men who were not yet dead.  Their bodies were covered with fur and soft-tanned leather.  Eyelashes and cheeks and lips were so coated with the crystals from their frozen breath that their faces were not discernible.  This gave them the seeming of ghostly masques, undertakers in a spectral world at the funeral of some ghost.  But under it all they were men, penetrating the land of desolation and mockery and silence, puny adventurers bent on colossal adventure, pitting themselves against the might of a world as remote and alien and pulseless as the abysses of space.

They travelled on without speech, saving their breath for the work of their bodies.  On every side was the silence, pressing upon them with a tangible presence.  It affected their minds as the many atmospheres of deep water affect the body of the diver.  It crushed them with the weight of unending vastness and unalterable decree.  It crushed them into the remotest recesses of their own minds, pressing out of them, like juices from the grape, all the false ardours and exaltations and undue self-values of the human soul, until they perceived themselves finite and small, specks and motes, moving with weak cunning and little wisdom amidst the play and inter-play of the great blind elements and forces.

An hour went by, and a second hour.  The pale light of the short sunless day was beginning to fade, when a faint far cry arose on the still air.  It soared upward with a swift rush, till it reached its topmost note, where it persisted, palpitant and tense, and then slowly died away.  It might have been a lost soul wailing, had it not been invested with a certain sad fierceness and hungry eagerness.  The front man turned his head until his eyes met the eyes of the man behind.  And then, across the narrow oblong box, each nodded to the other.

A second cry arose, piercing the silence with needle-like shrillness.  Both men located the sound.  It was to the rear, somewhere in the snow expanse they had just traversed.  A third and answering cry arose, also to the rear and to the left of the second cry.

“They’re after us, Bill,” said the man at the front.

His voice sounded hoarse and unreal, and he had spoken with apparent effort.

“Meat is scarce,” answered his comrade.  “I ain’t seen a rabbit sign for days.”

Thereafter they spoke no more, though their ears were keen for the hunting-cries that continued to rise behind them.

At the fall of darkness they swung the dogs into a cluster of spruce trees on the edge of the waterway and made a camp.  The coffin, at the side of the fire, served for seat and table.  The wolf-dogs, clustered on the far side of the fire, snarled and bickered among themselves, but evinced no inclination to stray off into the darkness.

“Seems to me, Henry, they’re stayin’ remarkable close to camp,” Bill commented.

Henry, squatting over the fire and settling the pot of coffee with a piece of ice, nodded.  Nor did he speak till he had taken his seat on the coffin and begun to eat.

“They know where their hides is safe,” he said.  “They’d sooner eat grub than be grub.  They’re pretty wise, them dogs.”

Bill shook his head.  “Oh, I don’t know.”

His comrade looked at him curiously.  “First time I ever heard you say anything about their not bein’ wise.”

“Henry,” said the other, munching with deliberation the beans he was eating, “did you happen to notice the way them dogs kicked up when I was a-feedin’ ’em?”

“They did cut up more’n usual,” Henry acknowledged.

“How many dogs ’ve we got, Henry?”

“Six.”

“Well, Henry . . . ” Bill stopped for a moment, in order that his words might gain greater significance.  “As I was sayin’, Henry, we’ve got six dogs.  I took six fish out of the bag.  I gave one fish to each dog, an’, Henry, I was one fish short.”

“You counted wrong.”

“We’ve got six dogs,” the other reiterated dispassionately.  “I took out six fish.  One Ear didn’t get no fish.  I came back to the bag afterward an’ got ’m his fish.”

“We’ve only got six dogs,” Henry said.

“Henry,” Bill went on.  “I won’t say they was all dogs, but there was seven of ’m that got fish.”

Henry stopped eating to glance across the fire and count the dogs.

“There’s only six now,” he said.

“I saw the other one run off across the snow,” Bill announced with cool positiveness.  “I saw seven.”

Henry looked at him commiseratingly, and said, “I’ll be almighty glad when this trip’s over.”

“What d’ye mean by that?” Bill demanded.

“I mean that this load of ourn is gettin’ on your nerves, an’ that you’re beginnin’ to see things.”

“I thought of that,” Bill answered gravely.  “An’ so, when I saw it run off across the snow, I looked in the snow an’ saw its tracks.  Then I counted the dogs an’ there was still six of ’em.  The tracks is there in the snow now.  D’ye want to look at ’em?  I’ll show ’em to you.”

Henry did not reply, but munched on in silence, until, the meal finished, he topped it with a final cup of coffee.  He wiped his mouth with the back of his hand and said:

“Then you’re thinkin’ as it was—”

A long wailing cry, fiercely sad, from somewhere in the darkness, had interrupted him.  He stopped to listen to it, then he finished his sentence with a wave of his hand toward the sound of the cry, “—one of them?”

Bill nodded.  “I’d a blame sight sooner think that than anything else.  You noticed yourself the row the dogs made.”

Cry after cry, and answering cries, were turning the silence into a bedlam.  From every side the cries arose, and the dogs betrayed their fear by huddling together and so close to the fire that their hair was scorched by the heat.  Bill threw on more wood, before lighting his pipe.

“I’m thinking you’re down in the mouth some,” Henry said.

“Henry . . . ”  He sucked meditatively at his pipe for some time before he went on.  “Henry, I was a-thinkin’ what a blame sight luckier he is than you an’ me’ll ever be.”

He indicated the third person by a downward thrust of the thumb to the box on which they sat.

“You an’ me, Henry, when we die, we’ll be lucky if we get enough stones over our carcases to keep the dogs off of us.”

“But we ain’t got people an’ money an’ all the rest, like him,” Henry rejoined.  “Long-distance funerals is somethin’ you an’ me can’t exactly afford.”

“What gets me, Henry, is what a chap like this, that’s a lord or something in his own country, and that’s never had to bother about grub nor blankets; why he comes a-buttin’ round the Godforsaken ends of the earth—that’s what I can’t exactly see.”

“He might have lived to a ripe old age if he’d stayed at home,” Henry agreed.

Bill opened his mouth to speak, but changed his mind.  Instead, he pointed towards the wall of darkness that pressed about them from every side.  There was no suggestion of form in the utter blackness; only could be seen a pair of eyes gleaming like live coals.  Henry indicated with his head a second pair, and a third.  A circle of the gleaming eyes had drawn about their camp.  Now and again a pair of eyes moved, or disappeared to appear again a moment later.

The unrest of the dogs had been increasing, and they stampeded, in a surge of sudden fear, to the near side of the fire, cringing and crawling about the legs of the men.  In the scramble one of the dogs had been overturned on the edge of the fire, and it had yelped with pain and fright as the smell of its singed coat possessed the air.  The commotion caused the circle of eyes to shift restlessly for a moment and even to withdraw a bit, but it settled down again as the dogs became quiet.

“Henry, it’s a blame misfortune to be out of ammunition.”

Bill had finished his pipe and was helping his companion to spread the bed of fur and blanket upon the spruce boughs which he had laid over the snow before supper.  Henry grunted, and began unlacing his moccasins.

“How many cartridges did you say you had left?” he asked.

“Three,” came the answer.  “An’ I wisht ’twas three hundred.  Then I’d show ’em what for, damn ’em!”

He shook his fist angrily at the gleaming eyes, and began securely to prop his moccasins before the fire.

“An’ I wisht this cold snap’d break,” he went on.  “It’s ben fifty below for two weeks now.  An’ I wisht I’d never started on this trip, Henry.  I don’t like the looks of it.  I don’t feel right, somehow.  An’ while I’m wishin’, I wisht the trip was over an’ done with, an’ you an’ me a-sittin’ by the fire in Fort McGurry just about now an’ playing cribbage—that’s what I wisht.”

Henry grunted and crawled into bed.  As he dozed off he was aroused by his comrade’s voice.

“Say, Henry, that other one that come in an’ got a fish—why didn’t the dogs pitch into it?  That’s what’s botherin’ me.”

“You’re botherin’ too much, Bill,” came the sleepy response.  “You was never like this before.  You jes’ shut up now, an’ go to sleep, an’ you’ll be all hunkydory in the mornin’.  Your stomach’s sour, that’s what’s botherin’ you.”

The men slept, breathing heavily, side by side, under the one covering.  The fire died down, and the gleaming eyes drew closer the circle they had flung about the camp.  The dogs clustered together in fear, now and again snarling menacingly as a pair of eyes drew close.  Once their uproar became so loud that Bill woke up.  He got out of bed carefully, so as not to disturb the sleep of his comrade, and threw more wood on the fire.  As it began to flame up, the circle of eyes drew farther back.  He glanced casually at the huddling dogs.  He rubbed his eyes and looked at them more sharply.  Then he crawled back into the blankets.

“Henry,” he said.  “Oh, Henry.”

Henry groaned as he passed from sleep to waking, and demanded, “What’s wrong now?”

“Nothin’,” came the answer; “only there’s seven of ’em again.  I just counted.”

Henry acknowledged receipt of the information with a grunt that slid into a snore as he drifted back into sleep.

In the morning it was Henry who awoke first and routed his companion out of bed.  Daylight was yet three hours away, though it was already six o’clock; and in the darkness Henry went about preparing breakfast, while Bill rolled the blankets and made the sled ready for lashing.

“Say, Henry,” he asked suddenly, “how many dogs did you say we had?”

“Six.”

“Wrong,” Bill proclaimed triumphantly.

“Seven again?” Henry queried.

“No, five; one’s gone.”

“The hell!”  Henry cried in wrath, leaving the cooking to come and count the dogs.

“You’re right, Bill,” he concluded.  “Fatty’s gone.”

“An’ he went like greased lightnin’ once he got started.  Couldn’t ’ve seen ’m for smoke.”

“No chance at all,” Henry concluded.  “They jes’ swallowed ’m alive.  I bet he was yelpin’ as he went down their throats, damn ’em!”

“He always was a fool dog,” said Bill.

“But no fool dog ought to be fool enough to go off an’ commit suicide that way.”  He looked over the remainder of the team with a speculative eye that summed up instantly the salient traits of each animal.  “I bet none of the others would do it.”

“Couldn’t drive ’em away from the fire with a club,” Bill agreed.  “I always did think there was somethin’ wrong with Fatty anyway.”

And this was the epitaph of a dead dog on the Northland trail—less scant than the epitaph of many another dog, of many a man.
CHAPTER II—THE SHE-WOLF

Breakfast eaten and the slim camp-outfit lashed to the sled, the men turned their backs on the cheery fire and launched out into the darkness.  At once began to rise the cries that were fiercely sad—cries that called through the darkness and cold to one another and answered back.  Conversation ceased.  Daylight came at nine o’clock.  At midday the sky to the south warmed to rose-colour, and marked where the bulge of the earth intervened between the meridian sun and the northern world.  But the rose-colour swiftly faded.  The grey light of day that remained lasted until three o’clock, when it, too, faded, and the pall of the Arctic night descended upon the lone and silent land.

As darkness came on, the hunting-cries to right and left and rear drew closer—so close that more than once they sent surges of fear through the toiling dogs, throwing them into short-lived panics.

At the conclusion of one such panic, when he and Henry had got the dogs back in the traces, Bill said:

“I wisht they’d strike game somewheres, an’ go away an’ leave us alone.”

“They do get on the nerves horrible,”  Henry sympathised.

They spoke no more until camp was made.

Henry was bending over and adding ice to the babbling pot of beans when he was startled by the sound of a blow, an exclamation from Bill, and a sharp snarling cry of pain from among the dogs.  He straightened up in time to see a dim form disappearing across the snow into the shelter of the dark.  Then he saw Bill, standing amid the dogs, half triumphant, half crestfallen, in one hand a stout club, in the other the tail and part of the body of a sun-cured salmon.

“It got half of it,” he announced; “but I got a whack at it jes’ the same.  D’ye hear it squeal?”

“What’d it look like?” Henry asked.

“Couldn’t see.  But it had four legs an’ a mouth an’ hair an’ looked like any dog.”

“Must be a tame wolf, I reckon.”

“It’s damned tame, whatever it is, comin’ in here at feedin’ time an’ gettin’ its whack of fish.”

That night, when supper was finished and they sat on the oblong box and pulled at their pipes, the circle of gleaming eyes drew in even closer than before.

“I wisht they’d spring up a bunch of moose or something, an’ go away an’ leave us alone,” Bill said.

Henry grunted with an intonation that was not all sympathy, and for a quarter of an hour they sat on in silence, Henry staring at the fire, and Bill at the circle of eyes that burned in the darkness just beyond the firelight.

“I wisht we was pullin’ into McGurry right now,” he began again.

“Shut up your wishin’ and your croakin’,” Henry burst out angrily.  “Your stomach’s sour.  That’s what’s ailin’ you.  Swallow a spoonful of sody, an’ you’ll sweeten up wonderful an’ be more pleasant company.”

In the morning Henry was aroused by fervid blasphemy that proceeded from the mouth of Bill.  Henry propped himself up on an elbow and looked to see his comrade standing among the dogs beside the replenished fire, his arms raised in objurgation, his face distorted with passion.

“Hello!” Henry called.  “What’s up now?”

“Frog’s gone,” came the answer.

“No.”

“I tell you yes.”

Henry leaped out of the blankets and to the dogs.  He counted them with care, and then joined his partner in cursing the power of the Wild that had robbed them of another dog.

“Frog was the strongest dog of the bunch,” Bill pronounced finally.

“An’ he was no fool dog neither,” Henry added.

And so was recorded the second epitaph in two days.

A gloomy breakfast was eaten, and the four remaining dogs were harnessed to the sled.  The day was a repetition of the days that had gone before.  The men toiled without speech across the face of the frozen world.  The silence was unbroken save by the cries of their pursuers, that, unseen, hung upon their rear.  With the coming of night in the mid-afternoon, the cries sounded closer as the pursuers drew in according to their custom; and the dogs grew excited and frightened, and were guilty of panics that tangled the traces and further depressed the two men.

“There, that’ll fix you fool critters,” Bill said with satisfaction that night, standing erect at completion of his task.

Henry left the cooking to come and see.  Not only had his partner tied the dogs up, but he had tied them, after the Indian fashion, with sticks.  About the neck of each dog he had fastened a leather thong.  To this, and so close to the neck that the dog could not get his teeth to it, he had tied a stout stick four or five feet in length.  The other end of the stick, in turn, was made fast to a stake in the ground by means of a leather thong.  The dog was unable to gnaw through the leather at his own end of the stick.  The stick prevented him from getting at the leather that fastened the other end.

Henry nodded his head approvingly.

“It’s the only contraption that’ll ever hold One Ear,” he said.  “He can gnaw through leather as clean as a knife an’ jes’ about half as quick.  They all’ll be here in the mornin’ hunkydory.”

“You jes’ bet they will,” Bill affirmed.  “If one of em’ turns up missin’, I’ll go without my coffee.”

“They jes’ know we ain’t loaded to kill,” Henry remarked at bed-time, indicating the gleaming circle that hemmed them in.  “If we could put a couple of shots into ’em, they’d be more respectful.  They come closer every night.  Get the firelight out of your eyes an’ look hard—there!  Did you see that one?”

For some time the two men amused themselves with watching the movement of vague forms on the edge of the firelight.  By looking closely and steadily at where a pair of eyes burned in the darkness, the form of the animal would slowly take shape.  They could even see these forms move at times.

A sound among the dogs attracted the men’s attention.  One Ear was uttering quick, eager whines, lunging at the length of his stick toward the darkness, and desisting now and again in order to make frantic attacks on the stick with his teeth.

“Look at that, Bill,” Henry whispered.

Full into the firelight, with a stealthy, sidelong movement, glided a doglike animal.  It moved with commingled mistrust and daring, cautiously observing the men, its attention fixed on the dogs.  One Ear strained the full length of the stick toward the intruder and whined with eagerness.

“That fool One Ear don’t seem scairt much,” Bill said in a low tone.

“It’s a she-wolf,” Henry whispered back, “an’ that accounts for Fatty an’ Frog.  She’s the decoy for the pack.  She draws out the dog an’ then all the rest pitches in an’ eats ’m up.”

The fire crackled.  A log fell apart with a loud spluttering noise.  At the sound of it the strange animal leaped back into the darkness.

“Henry, I’m a-thinkin’,” Bill announced.

“Thinkin’ what?”

“I’m a-thinkin’ that was the one I lambasted with the club.”

“Ain’t the slightest doubt in the world,” was Henry’s response.

“An’ right here I want to remark,” Bill went on, “that that animal’s familyarity with campfires is suspicious an’ immoral.”

“It knows for certain more’n a self-respectin’ wolf ought to know,” Henry agreed.  “A wolf that knows enough to come in with the dogs at feedin’ time has had experiences.”

“Ol’ Villan had a dog once that run away with the wolves,” Bill cogitates aloud.  “I ought to know.  I shot it out of the pack in a moose pasture over ‘on Little Stick.  An’ Ol’ Villan cried like a baby.  Hadn’t seen it for three years, he said.  Ben with the wolves all that time.”

“I reckon you’ve called the turn, Bill.  That wolf’s a dog, an’ it’s eaten fish many’s the time from the hand of man.”

“An if I get a chance at it, that wolf that’s a dog’ll be jes’ meat,” Bill declared.  “We can’t afford to lose no more animals.”

“But you’ve only got three cartridges,” Henry objected.

“I’ll wait for a dead sure shot,” was the reply.

In the morning Henry renewed the fire and cooked breakfast to the accompaniment of his partner’s snoring.

“You was sleepin’ jes’ too comfortable for anything,” Henry told him, as he routed him out for breakfast.  “I hadn’t the heart to rouse you.”

Bill began to eat sleepily.  He noticed that his cup was empty and started to reach for the pot.  But the pot was beyond arm’s length and beside Henry.

“Say, Henry,” he chided gently, “ain’t you forgot somethin’?”

Henry looked about with great carefulness and shook his head.  Bill held up the empty cup.

“You don’t get no coffee,” Henry announced.

“Ain’t run out?” Bill asked anxiously.

“Nope.”

“Ain’t thinkin’ it’ll hurt my digestion?”

“Nope.”

A flush of angry blood pervaded Bill’s face.

“Then it’s jes’ warm an’ anxious I am to be hearin’ you explain yourself,” he said.

“Spanker’s gone,” Henry answered.

Without haste, with the air of one resigned to misfortune Bill turned his head, and from where he sat counted the dogs.

“How’d it happen?” he asked apathetically.

Henry shrugged his shoulders.  “Don’t know.  Unless One Ear gnawed ’m loose.  He couldn’t a-done it himself, that’s sure.”

“The darned cuss.”  Bill spoke gravely and slowly, with no hint of the anger that was raging within.  “Jes’ because he couldn’t chew himself loose, he chews Spanker loose.”

“Well, Spanker’s troubles is over anyway; I guess he’s digested by this time an’ cavortin’ over the landscape in the bellies of twenty different wolves,” was Henry’s epitaph on this, the latest lost dog.  “Have some coffee, Bill.”

But Bill shook his head.

“Go on,” Henry pleaded, elevating the pot.

Bill shoved his cup aside.  “I’ll be ding-dong-danged if I do.  I said I wouldn’t if ary dog turned up missin’, an’ I won’t.”

“It’s darn good coffee,” Henry said enticingly.

But Bill was stubborn, and he ate a dry breakfast washed down with mumbled curses at One Ear for the trick he had played.

“I’ll tie ’em up out of reach of each other to-night,” Bill said, as they took the trail.

They had travelled little more than a hundred yards, when Henry, who was in front, bent down and picked up something with which his snowshoe had collided.  It was dark, and he could not see it, but he recognised it by the touch.  He flung it back, so that it struck the sled and bounced along until it fetched up on Bill’s snowshoes.

“Mebbe you’ll need that in your business,” Henry said.

Bill uttered an exclamation.  It was all that was left of Spanker—the stick with which he had been tied.

“They ate ’m hide an’ all,” Bill announced.  “The stick’s as clean as a whistle.  They’ve ate the leather offen both ends.  They’re damn hungry, Henry, an’ they’ll have you an’ me guessin’ before this trip’s over.”

Henry laughed defiantly.  “I ain’t been trailed this way by wolves before, but I’ve gone through a whole lot worse an’ kept my health.  Takes more’n a handful of them pesky critters to do for yours truly, Bill, my son.”

“I don’t know, I don’t know,” Bill muttered ominously.

“Well, you’ll know all right when we pull into McGurry.”

“I ain’t feelin’ special enthusiastic,” Bill persisted.

“You’re off colour, that’s what’s the matter with you,” Henry dogmatised.  “What you need is quinine, an’ I’m goin’ to dose you up stiff as soon as we make McGurry.”

Bill grunted his disagreement with the diagnosis, and lapsed into silence.  The day was like all the days.  Light came at nine o’clock.  At twelve o’clock the southern horizon was warmed by the unseen sun; and then began the cold grey of afternoon that would merge, three hours later, into night.

It was just after the sun’s futile effort to appear, that Bill slipped the rifle from under the sled-lashings and said:

“You keep right on, Henry, I’m goin’ to see what I can see.”

“You’d better stick by the sled,” his partner protested.  “You’ve only got three cartridges, an’ there’s no tellin’ what might happen.”

“Who’s croaking now?” Bill demanded triumphantly.

Henry made no reply, and plodded on alone, though often he cast anxious glances back into the grey solitude where his partner had disappeared.  An hour later, taking advantage of the cut-offs around which the sled had to go, Bill arrived.

“They’re scattered an’ rangin’ along wide,” he said: “keeping up with us an’ lookin’ for game at the same time.  You see, they’re sure of us, only they know they’ve got to wait to get us.  In the meantime they’re willin’ to pick up anything eatable that comes handy.”

“You mean they think they’re sure of us,” Henry objected pointedly.

But Bill ignored him.  “I seen some of them.  They’re pretty thin.  They ain’t had a bite in weeks I reckon, outside of Fatty an’ Frog an’ Spanker; an’ there’s so many of ’em that that didn’t go far.  They’re remarkable thin.  Their ribs is like wash-boards, an’ their stomachs is right up against their backbones.  They’re pretty desperate, I can tell you.  They’ll be goin’ mad, yet, an’ then watch out.”

A few minutes later, Henry, who was now travelling behind the sled, emitted a low, warning whistle.  Bill turned and looked, then quietly stopped the dogs.  To the rear, from around the last bend and plainly into view, on the very trail they had just covered, trotted a furry, slinking form.  Its nose was to the trail, and it trotted with a peculiar, sliding, effortless gait.  When they halted, it halted, throwing up its head and regarding them steadily with nostrils that twitched as it caught and studied the scent of them.

“It’s the she-wolf,” Bill answered.

The dogs had lain down in the snow, and he walked past them to join his partner in the sled.  Together they watched the strange animal that had pursued them for days and that had already accomplished the destruction of half their dog-team.

After a searching scrutiny, the animal trotted forward a few steps.  This it repeated several times, till it was a short hundred yards away.  It paused, head up, close by a clump of spruce trees, and with sight and scent studied the outfit of the watching men.  It looked at them in a strangely wistful way, after the manner of a dog; but in its wistfulness there was none of the dog affection.  It was a wistfulness bred of hunger, as cruel as its own fangs, as merciless as the frost itself.

It was large for a wolf, its gaunt frame advertising the lines of an animal that was among the largest of its kind.

“Stands pretty close to two feet an’ a half at the shoulders,” Henry commented.  “An’ I’ll bet it ain’t far from five feet long.”

“Kind of strange colour for a wolf,” was Bill’s criticism.  “I never seen a red wolf before.  Looks almost cinnamon to me.”

The animal was certainly not cinnamon-coloured.  Its coat was the true wolf-coat.  The dominant colour was grey, and yet there was to it a faint reddish hue—a hue that was baffling, that appeared and disappeared, that was more like an illusion of the vision, now grey, distinctly grey, and again giving hints and glints of a vague redness of colour not classifiable in terms of ordinary experience.

“Looks for all the world like a big husky sled-dog,” Bill said.  “I wouldn’t be s’prised to see it wag its tail.”

“Hello, you husky!” he called.  “Come here, you whatever-your-name-is.”

“Ain’t a bit scairt of you,” Henry laughed.

Bill waved his hand at it threateningly and shouted loudly; but the animal betrayed no fear.  The only change in it that they could notice was an accession of alertness.  It still regarded them with the merciless wistfulness of hunger.  They were meat, and it was hungry; and it would like to go in and eat them if it dared.

“Look here, Henry,” Bill said, unconsciously lowering his voice to a whisper because of what he imitated.  “We’ve got three cartridges.  But it’s a dead shot.  Couldn’t miss it.  It’s got away with three of our dogs, an’ we oughter put a stop to it.  What d’ye say?”

Henry nodded his consent.  Bill cautiously slipped the gun from under the sled-lashing.  The gun was on the way to his shoulder, but it never got there.  For in that instant the she-wolf leaped sidewise from the trail into the clump of spruce trees and disappeared.

The two men looked at each other.  Henry whistled long and comprehendingly.

“I might have knowed it,” Bill chided himself aloud as he replaced the gun.  “Of course a wolf that knows enough to come in with the dogs at feedin’ time, ’d know all about shooting-irons.  I tell you right now, Henry, that critter’s the cause of all our trouble.  We’d have six dogs at the present time, ’stead of three, if it wasn’t for her.  An’ I tell you right now, Henry, I’m goin’ to get her.  She’s too smart to be shot in the open.  But I’m goin’ to lay for her.  I’ll bushwhack her as sure as my name is Bill.”

“You needn’t stray off too far in doin’ it,” his partner admonished.  “If that pack ever starts to jump you, them three cartridges’d be wuth no more’n three whoops in hell.  Them animals is damn hungry, an’ once they start in, they’ll sure get you, Bill.”

They camped early that night.  Three dogs could not drag the sled so fast nor for so long hours as could six, and they were showing unmistakable signs of playing out.  And the men went early to bed, Bill first seeing to it that the dogs were tied out of gnawing-reach of one another.

But the wolves were growing bolder, and the men were aroused more than once from their sleep.  So near did the wolves approach, that the dogs became frantic with terror, and it was necessary to replenish the fire from time to time in order to keep the adventurous marauders at safer distance.

“I’ve hearn sailors talk of sharks followin’ a ship,” Bill remarked, as he crawled back into the blankets after one such replenishing of the fire.  “Well, them wolves is land sharks.  They know their business better’n we do, an’ they ain’t a-holdin’ our trail this way for their health.  They’re goin’ to get us.  They’re sure goin’ to get us, Henry.”

“They’ve half got you a’ready, a-talkin’ like that,” Henry retorted sharply.  “A man’s half licked when he says he is.  An’ you’re half eaten from the way you’re goin’ on about it.”

“They’ve got away with better men than you an’ me,” Bill answered.

“Oh, shet up your croakin’.  You make me all-fired tired.”

Henry rolled over angrily on his side, but was surprised that Bill made no similar display of temper.  This was not Bill’s way, for he was easily angered by sharp words.  Henry thought long over it before he went to sleep, and as his eyelids fluttered down and he dozed off, the thought in his mind was: “There’s no mistakin’ it, Bill’s almighty blue.  I’ll have to cheer him up to-morrow.”
CHAPTER III—THE HUNGER CRY

The day began auspiciously.  They had lost no dogs during the night, and they swung out upon the trail and into the silence, the darkness, and the cold with spirits that were fairly light.  Bill seemed to have forgotten his forebodings of the previous night, and even waxed facetious with the dogs when, at midday, they overturned the sled on a bad piece of trail.

It was an awkward mix-up.  The sled was upside down and jammed between a tree-trunk and a huge rock, and they were forced to unharness the dogs in order to straighten out the tangle.  The two men were bent over the sled and trying to right it, when Henry observed One Ear sidling away.

“Here, you, One Ear!” he cried, straightening up and turning around on the dog.

But One Ear broke into a run across the snow, his traces trailing behind him.  And there, out in the snow of their back track, was the she-wolf waiting for him.  As he neared her, he became suddenly cautious.  He slowed down to an alert and mincing walk and then stopped.  He regarded her carefully and dubiously, yet desirefully.  She seemed to smile at him, showing her teeth in an ingratiating rather than a menacing way.  She moved toward him a few steps, playfully, and then halted.  One Ear drew near to her, still alert and cautious, his tail and ears in the air, his head held high.

He tried to sniff noses with her, but she retreated playfully and coyly.  Every advance on his part was accompanied by a corresponding retreat on her part.  Step by step she was luring him away from the security of his human companionship.  Once, as though a warning had in vague ways flitted through his intelligence, he turned his head and looked back at the overturned sled, at his team-mates, and at the two men who were calling to him.

But whatever idea was forming in his mind, was dissipated by the she-wolf, who advanced upon him, sniffed noses with him for a fleeting instant, and then resumed her coy retreat before his renewed advances.

In the meantime, Bill had bethought himself of the rifle.  But it was jammed beneath the overturned sled, and by the time Henry had helped him to right the load, One Ear and the she-wolf were too close together and the distance too great to risk a shot.

Too late One Ear learned his mistake.  Before they saw the cause, the two men saw him turn and start to run back toward them.  Then, approaching at right angles to the trail and cutting off his retreat they saw a dozen wolves, lean and grey, bounding across the snow.  On the instant, the she-wolf’s coyness and playfulness disappeared.  With a snarl she sprang upon One Ear.  He thrust her off with his shoulder, and, his retreat cut off and still intent on regaining the sled, he altered his course in an attempt to circle around to it.  More wolves were appearing every moment and joining in the chase.  The she-wolf was one leap behind One Ear and holding her own.

“Where are you goin’?” Henry suddenly demanded, laying his hand on his partner’s arm.

Bill shook it off.  “I won’t stand it,” he said.  “They ain’t a-goin’ to get any more of our dogs if I can help it.”

Gun in hand, he plunged into the underbrush that lined the side of the trail.  His intention was apparent enough.  Taking the sled as the centre of the circle that One Ear was making, Bill planned to tap that circle at a point in advance of the pursuit.  With his rifle, in the broad daylight, it might be possible for him to awe the wolves and save the dog.

“Say, Bill!” Henry called after him.  “Be careful!  Don’t take no chances!”

Henry sat down on the sled and watched.  There was nothing else for him to do.  Bill had already gone from sight; but now and again, appearing and disappearing amongst the underbrush and the scattered clumps of spruce, could be seen One Ear.  Henry judged his case to be hopeless.  The dog was thoroughly alive to its danger, but it was running on the outer circle while the wolf-pack was running on the inner and shorter circle.  It was vain to think of One Ear so outdistancing his pursuers as to be able to cut across their circle in advance of them and to regain the sled.

The different lines were rapidly approaching a point.  Somewhere out there in the snow, screened from his sight by trees and thickets, Henry knew that the wolf-pack, One Ear, and Bill were coming together.  All too quickly, far more quickly than he had expected, it happened.  He heard a shot, then two shots, in rapid succession, and he knew that Bill’s ammunition was gone.  Then he heard a great outcry of snarls and yelps.  He recognised One Ear’s yell of pain and terror, and he heard a wolf-cry that bespoke a stricken animal.  And that was all.  The snarls ceased.  The yelping died away.  Silence settled down again over the lonely land.

He sat for a long while upon the sled.  There was no need for him to go and see what had happened.  He knew it as though it had taken place before his eyes.  Once, he roused with a start and hastily got the axe out from underneath the lashings.  But for some time longer he sat and brooded, the two remaining dogs crouching and trembling at his feet.

At last he arose in a weary manner, as though all the resilience had gone out of his body, and proceeded to fasten the dogs to the sled.  He passed a rope over his shoulder, a man-trace, and pulled with the dogs.  He did not go far.  At the first hint of darkness he hastened to make a camp, and he saw to it that he had a generous supply of firewood.  He fed the dogs, cooked and ate his supper, and made his bed close to the fire.

But he was not destined to enjoy that bed.  Before his eyes closed the wolves had drawn too near for safety.  It no longer required an effort of the vision to see them.  They were all about him and the fire, in a narrow circle, and he could see them plainly in the firelight lying down, sitting up, crawling forward on their bellies, or slinking back and forth.  They even slept.  Here and there he could see one curled up in the snow like a dog, taking the sleep that was now denied himself.

He kept the fire brightly blazing, for he knew that it alone intervened between the flesh of his body and their hungry fangs.  His two dogs stayed close by him, one on either side, leaning against him for protection, crying and whimpering, and at times snarling desperately when a wolf approached a little closer than usual.  At such moments, when his dogs snarled, the whole circle would be agitated, the wolves coming to their feet and pressing tentatively forward, a chorus of snarls and eager yelps rising about him.  Then the circle would lie down again, and here and there a wolf would resume its broken nap.

But this circle had a continuous tendency to draw in upon him.  Bit by bit, an inch at a time, with here a wolf bellying forward, and there a wolf bellying forward, the circle would narrow until the brutes were almost within springing distance.  Then he would seize brands from the fire and hurl them into the pack.  A hasty drawing back always resulted, accompanied by angry yelps and frightened snarls when a well-aimed brand struck and scorched a too daring animal.

Morning found the man haggard and worn, wide-eyed from want of sleep.  He cooked breakfast in the darkness, and at nine o’clock, when, with the coming of daylight, the wolf-pack drew back, he set about the task he had planned through the long hours of the night.  Chopping down young saplings, he made them cross-bars of a scaffold by lashing them high up to the trunks of standing trees.  Using the sled-lashing for a heaving rope, and with the aid of the dogs, he hoisted the coffin to the top of the scaffold.

“They got Bill, an’ they may get me, but they’ll sure never get you, young man,” he said, addressing the dead body in its tree-sepulchre.

Then he took the trail, the lightened sled bounding along behind the willing dogs; for they, too, knew that safety lay open in the gaining of Fort McGurry.  The wolves were now more open in their pursuit, trotting sedately behind and ranging along on either side, their red tongues lolling out, their lean sides showing the undulating ribs with every movement.  They were very lean, mere skin-bags stretched over bony frames, with strings for muscles—so lean that Henry found it in his mind to marvel that they still kept their feet and did not collapse forthright in the snow.

He did not dare travel until dark.  At midday, not only did the sun warm the southern horizon, but it even thrust its upper rim, pale and golden, above the sky-line.  He received it as a sign.  The days were growing longer.  The sun was returning.  But scarcely had the cheer of its light departed, than he went into camp.  There were still several hours of grey daylight and sombre twilight, and he utilised them in chopping an enormous supply of fire-wood.

With night came horror.  Not only were the starving wolves growing bolder, but lack of sleep was telling upon Henry.  He dozed despite himself, crouching by the fire, the blankets about his shoulders, the axe between his knees, and on either side a dog pressing close against him.  He awoke once and saw in front of him, not a dozen feet away, a big grey wolf, one of the largest of the pack.  And even as he looked, the brute deliberately stretched himself after the manner of a lazy dog, yawning full in his face and looking upon him with a possessive eye, as if, in truth, he were merely a delayed meal that was soon to be eaten.

This certitude was shown by the whole pack.  Fully a score he could count, staring hungrily at him or calmly sleeping in the snow.  They reminded him of children gathered about a spread table and awaiting permission to begin to eat.  And he was the food they were to eat!  He wondered how and when the meal would begin.

As he piled wood on the fire he discovered an appreciation of his own body which he had never felt before.  He watched his moving muscles and was interested in the cunning mechanism of his fingers.  By the light of the fire he crooked his fingers slowly and repeatedly now one at a time, now all together, spreading them wide or making quick gripping movements.  He studied the nail-formation, and prodded the finger-tips, now sharply, and again softly, gauging the while the nerve-sensations produced.  It fascinated him, and he grew suddenly fond of this subtle flesh of his that worked so beautifully and smoothly and delicately.  Then he would cast a glance of fear at the wolf-circle drawn expectantly about him, and like a blow the realisation would strike him that this wonderful body of his, this living flesh, was no more than so much meat, a quest of ravenous animals, to be torn and slashed by their hungry fangs, to be sustenance to them as the moose and the rabbit had often been sustenance to him.

He came out of a doze that was half nightmare, to see the red-hued she-wolf before him.  She was not more than half a dozen feet away sitting in the snow and wistfully regarding him.  The two dogs were whimpering and snarling at his feet, but she took no notice of them.  She was looking at the man, and for some time he returned her look.  There was nothing threatening about her.  She looked at him merely with a great wistfulness, but he knew it to be the wistfulness of an equally great hunger.  He was the food, and the sight of him excited in her the gustatory sensations.  Her mouth opened, the saliva drooled forth, and she licked her chops with the pleasure of anticipation.

A spasm of fear went through him.  He reached hastily for a brand to throw at her.  But even as he reached, and before his fingers had closed on the missile, she sprang back into safety; and he knew that she was used to having things thrown at her.  She had snarled as she sprang away, baring her white fangs to their roots, all her wistfulness vanishing, being replaced by a carnivorous malignity that made him shudder.  He glanced at the hand that held the brand, noticing the cunning delicacy of the fingers that gripped it, how they adjusted themselves to all the inequalities of the surface, curling over and under and about the rough wood, and one little finger, too close to the burning portion of the brand, sensitively and automatically writhing back from the hurtful heat to a cooler gripping-place; and in the same instant he seemed to see a vision of those same sensitive and delicate fingers being crushed and torn by the white teeth of the she-wolf.  Never had he been so fond of this body of his as now when his tenure of it was so precarious.

All night, with burning brands, he fought off the hungry pack.  When he dozed despite himself, the whimpering and snarling of the dogs aroused him.  Morning came, but for the first time the light of day failed to scatter the wolves.  The man waited in vain for them to go.  They remained in a circle about him and his fire, displaying an arrogance of possession that shook his courage born of the morning light.

He made one desperate attempt to pull out on the trail.  But the moment he left the protection of the fire, the boldest wolf leaped for him, but leaped short.  He saved himself by springing back, the jaws snapping together a scant six inches from his thigh.  The rest of the pack was now up and surging upon him, and a throwing of firebrands right and left was necessary to drive them back to a respectful distance.

Even in the daylight he did not dare leave the fire to chop fresh wood.  Twenty feet away towered a huge dead spruce.  He spent half the day extending his campfire to the tree, at any moment a half dozen burning faggots ready at hand to fling at his enemies.  Once at the tree, he studied the surrounding forest in order to fell the tree in the direction of the most firewood.

The night was a repetition of the night before, save that the need for sleep was becoming overpowering.  The snarling of his dogs was losing its efficacy.  Besides, they were snarling all the time, and his benumbed and drowsy senses no longer took note of changing pitch and intensity.  He awoke with a start.  The she-wolf was less than a yard from him.  Mechanically, at short range, without letting go of it, he thrust a brand full into her open and snarling mouth.  She sprang away, yelling with pain, and while he took delight in the smell of burning flesh and hair, he watched her shaking her head and growling wrathfully a score of feet away.

But this time, before he dozed again, he tied a burning pine-knot to his right hand.  His eyes were closed but few minutes when the burn of the flame on his flesh awakened him.  For several hours he adhered to this programme.  Every time he was thus awakened he drove back the wolves with flying brands, replenished the fire, and rearranged the pine-knot on his hand.  All worked well, but there came a time when he fastened the pine-knot insecurely.  As his eyes closed it fell away from his hand.

He dreamed.  It seemed to him that he was in Fort McGurry.  It was warm and comfortable, and he was playing cribbage with the Factor.  Also, it seemed to him that the fort was besieged by wolves.  They were howling at the very gates, and sometimes he and the Factor paused from the game to listen and laugh at the futile efforts of the wolves to get in.  And then, so strange was the dream, there was a crash.  The door was burst open.  He could see the wolves flooding into the big living-room of the fort.  They were leaping straight for him and the Factor.  With the bursting open of the door, the noise of their howling had increased tremendously.  This howling now bothered him.  His dream was merging into something else—he knew not what; but through it all, following him, persisted the howling.

And then he awoke to find the howling real.  There was a great snarling and yelping.  The wolves were rushing him.  They were all about him and upon him.  The teeth of one had closed upon his arm.  Instinctively he leaped into the fire, and as he leaped, he felt the sharp slash of teeth that tore through the flesh of his leg.  Then began a fire fight.  His stout mittens temporarily protected his hands, and he scooped live coals into the air in all directions, until the campfire took on the semblance of a volcano.

But it could not last long.  His face was blistering in the heat, his eyebrows and lashes were singed off, and the heat was becoming unbearable to his feet.  With a flaming brand in each hand, he sprang to the edge of the fire.  The wolves had been driven back.  On every side, wherever the live coals had fallen, the snow was sizzling, and every little while a retiring wolf, with wild leap and snort and snarl, announced that one such live coal had been stepped upon.

Flinging his brands at the nearest of his enemies, the man thrust his smouldering mittens into the snow and stamped about to cool his feet.  His two dogs were missing, and he well knew that they had served as a course in the protracted meal which had begun days before with Fatty, the last course of which would likely be himself in the days to follow.

“You ain’t got me yet!” he cried, savagely shaking his fist at the hungry beasts; and at the sound of his voice the whole circle was agitated, there was a general snarl, and the she-wolf slid up close to him across the snow and watched him with hungry wistfulness.

He set to work to carry out a new idea that had come to him.  He extended the fire into a large circle.  Inside this circle he crouched, his sleeping outfit under him as a protection against the melting snow.  When he had thus disappeared within his shelter of flame, the whole pack came curiously to the rim of the fire to see what had become of him.  Hitherto they had been denied access to the fire, and they now settled down in a close-drawn circle, like so many dogs, blinking and yawning and stretching their lean bodies in the unaccustomed warmth.  Then the she-wolf sat down, pointed her nose at a star, and began to howl.  One by one the wolves joined her, till the whole pack, on haunches, with noses pointed skyward, was howling its hunger cry.

Dawn came, and daylight.  The fire was burning low.  The fuel had run out, and there was need to get more.  The man attempted to step out of his circle of flame, but the wolves surged to meet him.  Burning brands made them spring aside, but they no longer sprang back.  In vain he strove to drive them back.  As he gave up and stumbled inside his circle, a wolf leaped for him, missed, and landed with all four feet in the coals.  It cried out with terror, at the same time snarling, and scrambled back to cool its paws in the snow.

The man sat down on his blankets in a crouching position.  His body leaned forward from the hips.  His shoulders, relaxed and drooping, and his head on his knees advertised that he had given up the struggle.  Now and again he raised his head to note the dying down of the fire.  The circle of flame and coals was breaking into segments with openings in between.  These openings grew in size, the segments diminished.

“I guess you can come an’ get me any time,” he mumbled.  “Anyway, I’m goin’ to sleep.”

Once he awakened, and in an opening in the circle, directly in front of him, he saw the she-wolf gazing at him.

Again he awakened, a little later, though it seemed hours to him.  A mysterious change had taken place—so mysterious a change that he was shocked wider awake.  Something had happened.  He could not understand at first.  Then he discovered it.  The wolves were gone.  Remained only the trampled snow to show how closely they had pressed him.  Sleep was welling up and gripping him again, his head was sinking down upon his knees, when he roused with a sudden start.

There were cries of men, and churn of sleds, the creaking of harnesses, and the eager whimpering of straining dogs.  Four sleds pulled in from the river bed to the camp among the trees.  Half a dozen men were about the man who crouched in the centre of the dying fire.  They were shaking and prodding him into consciousness.  He looked at them like a drunken man and maundered in strange, sleepy speech.

“Red she-wolf. . . . Come in with the dogs at feedin’ time. . . . First she ate the dog-food. . . . Then she ate the dogs. . . . An’ after that she ate Bill. . . . ”

“Where’s Lord Alfred?” one of the men bellowed in his ear, shaking him roughly.

He shook his head slowly.  “No, she didn’t eat him. . . . He’s roostin’ in a tree at the last camp.”

“Dead?” the man shouted.

“An’ in a box,” Henry answered.  He jerked his shoulder petulantly away from the grip of his questioner.  “Say, you lemme alone. . . . I’m jes’ plump tuckered out. . . . Goo’ night, everybody.”

His eyes fluttered and went shut.  His chin fell forward on his chest.  And even as they eased him down upon the blankets his snores were rising on the frosty air.

But there was another sound.  Far and faint it was, in the remote distance, the cry of the hungry wolf-pack as it took the trail of other meat than the man it had just missed.
PART II
CHAPTER I—THE BATTLE OF THE FANGS

It was the she-wolf who had first caught the sound of men’s voices and the whining of the sled-dogs; and it was the she-wolf who was first to spring away from the cornered man in his circle of dying flame.  The pack had been loath to forego the kill it had hunted down, and it lingered for several minutes, making sure of the sounds, and then it, too, sprang away on the trail made by the she-wolf.

Running at the forefront of the pack was a large grey wolf—one of its several leaders.  It was he who directed the pack’s course on the heels of the she-wolf.  It was he who snarled warningly at the younger members of the pack or slashed at them with his fangs when they ambitiously tried to pass him.  And it was he who increased the pace when he sighted the she-wolf, now trotting slowly across the snow.

She dropped in alongside by him, as though it were her appointed position, and took the pace of the pack.  He did not snarl at her, nor show his teeth, when any leap of hers chanced to put her in advance of him.  On the contrary, he seemed kindly disposed toward her—too kindly to suit her, for he was prone to run near to her, and when he ran too near it was she who snarled and showed her teeth.  Nor was she above slashing his shoulder sharply on occasion.  At such times he betrayed no anger.  He merely sprang to the side and ran stiffly ahead for several awkward leaps, in carriage and conduct resembling an abashed country swain.

This was his one trouble in the running of the pack; but she had other troubles.  On her other side ran a gaunt old wolf, grizzled and marked with the scars of many battles.  He ran always on her right side.  The fact that he had but one eye, and that the left eye, might account for this.  He, also, was addicted to crowding her, to veering toward her till his scarred muzzle touched her body, or shoulder, or neck.  As with the running mate on the left, she repelled these attentions with her teeth; but when both bestowed their attentions at the same time she was roughly jostled, being compelled, with quick snaps to either side, to drive both lovers away and at the same time to maintain her forward leap with the pack and see the way of her feet before her.  At such times her running mates flashed their teeth and growled threateningly across at each other.  They might have fought, but even wooing and its rivalry waited upon the more pressing hunger-need of the pack.

After each repulse, when the old wolf sheered abruptly away from the sharp-toothed object of his desire, he shouldered against a young three-year-old that ran on his blind right side.  This young wolf had attained his full size; and, considering the weak and famished condition of the pack, he possessed more than the average vigour and spirit.  Nevertheless, he ran with his head even with the shoulder of his one-eyed elder.  When he ventured to run abreast of the older wolf (which was seldom), a snarl and a snap sent him back even with the shoulder again.  Sometimes, however, he dropped cautiously and slowly behind and edged in between the old leader and the she-wolf.  This was doubly resented, even triply resented.  When she snarled her displeasure, the old leader would whirl on the three-year-old.  Sometimes she whirled with him.  And sometimes the young leader on the left whirled, too.

At such times, confronted by three sets of savage teeth, the young wolf stopped precipitately, throwing himself back on his haunches, with fore-legs stiff, mouth menacing, and mane bristling.  This confusion in the front of the moving pack always caused confusion in the rear.  The wolves behind collided with the young wolf and expressed their displeasure by administering sharp nips on his hind-legs and flanks.  He was laying up trouble for himself, for lack of food and short tempers went together; but with the boundless faith of youth he persisted in repeating the manoeuvre every little while, though it never succeeded in gaining anything for him but discomfiture.

Had there been food, love-making and fighting would have gone on apace, and the pack-formation would have been broken up.  But the situation of the pack was desperate.  It was lean with long-standing hunger.  It ran below its ordinary speed.  At the rear limped the weak members, the very young and the very old.  At the front were the strongest.  Yet all were more like skeletons than full-bodied wolves.  Nevertheless, with the exception of the ones that limped, the movements of the animals were effortless and tireless.  Their stringy muscles seemed founts of inexhaustible energy.  Behind every steel-like contraction of a muscle, lay another steel-like contraction, and another, and another, apparently without end.

They ran many miles that day.  They ran through the night.  And the next day found them still running.  They were running over the surface of a world frozen and dead.  No life stirred.  They alone moved through the vast inertness.  They alone were alive, and they sought for other things that were alive in order that they might devour them and continue to live.

They crossed low divides and ranged a dozen small streams in a lower-lying country before their quest was rewarded.  Then they came upon moose.  It was a big bull they first found.  Here was meat and life, and it was guarded by no mysterious fires nor flying missiles of flame.  Splay hoofs and palmated antlers they knew, and they flung their customary patience and caution to the wind.  It was a brief fight and fierce.  The big bull was beset on every side.  He ripped them open or split their skulls with shrewdly driven blows of his great hoofs.  He crushed them and broke them on his large horns.  He stamped them into the snow under him in the wallowing struggle.  But he was foredoomed, and he went down with the she-wolf tearing savagely at his throat, and with other teeth fixed everywhere upon him, devouring him alive, before ever his last struggles ceased or his last damage had been wrought.

There was food in plenty.  The bull weighed over eight hundred pounds—fully twenty pounds of meat per mouth for the forty-odd wolves of the pack.  But if they could fast prodigiously, they could feed prodigiously, and soon a few scattered bones were all that remained of the splendid live brute that had faced the pack a few hours before.

There was now much resting and sleeping.  With full stomachs, bickering and quarrelling began among the younger males, and this continued through the few days that followed before the breaking-up of the pack.  The famine was over.  The wolves were now in the country of game, and though they still hunted in pack, they hunted more cautiously, cutting out heavy cows or crippled old bulls from the small moose-herds they ran across.

There came a day, in this land of plenty, when the wolf-pack split in half and went in different directions.  The she-wolf, the young leader on her left, and the one-eyed elder on her right, led their half of the pack down to the Mackenzie River and across into the lake country to the east.  Each day this remnant of the pack dwindled.  Two by two, male and female, the wolves were deserting.  Occasionally a solitary male was driven out by the sharp teeth of his rivals.  In the end there remained only four: the she-wolf, the young leader, the one-eyed one, and the ambitious three-year-old.

The she-wolf had by now developed a ferocious temper.  Her three suitors all bore the marks of her teeth.  Yet they never replied in kind, never defended themselves against her.  They turned their shoulders to her most savage slashes, and with wagging tails and mincing steps strove to placate her wrath.  But if they were all mildness toward her, they were all fierceness toward one another.  The three-year-old grew too ambitious in his fierceness.  He caught the one-eyed elder on his blind side and ripped his ear into ribbons.  Though the grizzled old fellow could see only on one side, against the youth and vigour of the other he brought into play the wisdom of long years of experience.  His lost eye and his scarred muzzle bore evidence to the nature of his experience.  He had survived too many battles to be in doubt for a moment about what to do.

The battle began fairly, but it did not end fairly.  There was no telling what the outcome would have been, for the third wolf joined the elder, and together, old leader and young leader, they attacked the ambitious three-year-old and proceeded to destroy him.  He was beset on either side by the merciless fangs of his erstwhile comrades.  Forgotten were the days they had hunted together, the game they had pulled down, the famine they had suffered.  That business was a thing of the past.  The business of love was at hand—ever a sterner and crueller business than that of food-getting.

And in the meanwhile, the she-wolf, the cause of it all, sat down contentedly on her haunches and watched.  She was even pleased.  This was her day—and it came not often—when manes bristled, and fang smote fang or ripped and tore the yielding flesh, all for the possession of her.

And in the business of love the three-year-old, who had made this his first adventure upon it, yielded up his life.  On either side of his body stood his two rivals.  They were gazing at the she-wolf, who sat smiling in the snow.  But the elder leader was wise, very wise, in love even as in battle.  The younger leader turned his head to lick a wound on his shoulder.  The curve of his neck was turned toward his rival.  With his one eye the elder saw the opportunity.  He darted in low and closed with his fangs.  It was a long, ripping slash, and deep as well.  His teeth, in passing, burst the wall of the great vein of the throat.  Then he leaped clear.

The young leader snarled terribly, but his snarl broke midmost into a tickling cough.  Bleeding and coughing, already stricken, he sprang at the elder and fought while life faded from him, his legs going weak beneath him, the light of day dulling on his eyes, his blows and springs falling shorter and shorter.

And all the while the she-wolf sat on her haunches and smiled.  She was made glad in vague ways by the battle, for this was the love-making of the Wild, the sex-tragedy of the natural world that was tragedy only to those that died.  To those that survived it was not tragedy, but realisation and achievement.

When the young leader lay in the snow and moved no more, One Eye stalked over to the she-wolf.  His carriage was one of mingled triumph and caution.  He was plainly expectant of a rebuff, and he was just as plainly surprised when her teeth did not flash out at him in anger.  For the first time she met him with a kindly manner.  She sniffed noses with him, and even condescended to leap about and frisk and play with him in quite puppyish fashion.  And he, for all his grey years and sage experience, behaved quite as puppyishly and even a little more foolishly.

Forgotten already were the vanquished rivals and the love-tale red-written on the snow.  Forgotten, save once, when old One Eye stopped for a moment to lick his stiffening wounds.  Then it was that his lips half writhed into a snarl, and the hair of his neck and shoulders involuntarily bristled, while he half crouched for a spring, his claws spasmodically clutching into the snow-surface for firmer footing.  But it was all forgotten the next moment, as he sprang after the she-wolf, who was coyly leading him a chase through the woods.

After that they ran side by side, like good friends who have come to an understanding.  The days passed by, and they kept together, hunting their meat and killing and eating it in common.  After a time the she-wolf began to grow restless.  She seemed to be searching for something that she could not find.  The hollows under fallen trees seemed to attract her, and she spent much time nosing about among the larger snow-piled crevices in the rocks and in the caves of overhanging banks.  Old One Eye was not interested at all, but he followed her good-naturedly in her quest, and when her investigations in particular places were unusually protracted, he would lie down and wait until she was ready to go on.

They did not remain in one place, but travelled across country until they regained the Mackenzie River, down which they slowly went, leaving it often to hunt game along the small streams that entered it, but always returning to it again.  Sometimes they chanced upon other wolves, usually in pairs; but there was no friendliness of intercourse displayed on either side, no gladness at meeting, no desire to return to the pack-formation.  Several times they encountered solitary wolves.  These were always males, and they were pressingly insistent on joining with One Eye and his mate.  This he resented, and when she stood shoulder to shoulder with him, bristling and showing her teeth, the aspiring solitary ones would back off, turn-tail, and continue on their lonely way.

One moonlight night, running through the quiet forest, One Eye suddenly halted.  His muzzle went up, his tail stiffened, and his nostrils dilated as he scented the air.  One foot also he held up, after the manner of a dog.  He was not satisfied, and he continued to smell the air, striving to understand the message borne upon it to him.  One careless sniff had satisfied his mate, and she trotted on to reassure him.  Though he followed her, he was still dubious, and he could not forbear an occasional halt in order more carefully to study the warning.

She crept out cautiously on the edge of a large open space in the midst of the trees.  For some time she stood alone.  Then One Eye, creeping and crawling, every sense on the alert, every hair radiating infinite suspicion, joined her.  They stood side by side, watching and listening and smelling.

To their ears came the sounds of dogs wrangling and scuffling, the guttural cries of men, the sharper voices of scolding women, and once the shrill and plaintive cry of a child.  With the exception of the huge bulks of the skin-lodges, little could be seen save the flames of the fire, broken by the movements of intervening bodies, and the smoke rising slowly on the quiet air.  But to their nostrils came the myriad smells of an Indian camp, carrying a story that was largely incomprehensible to One Eye, but every detail of which the she-wolf knew.

She was strangely stirred, and sniffed and sniffed with an increasing delight.  But old One Eye was doubtful.  He betrayed his apprehension, and started tentatively to go.  She turned and touched his neck with her muzzle in a reassuring way, then regarded the camp again.  A new wistfulness was in her face, but it was not the wistfulness of hunger.  She was thrilling to a desire that urged her to go forward, to be in closer to that fire, to be squabbling with the dogs, and to be avoiding and dodging the stumbling feet of men.

One Eye moved impatiently beside her; her unrest came back upon her, and she knew again her pressing need to find the thing for which she searched.  She turned and trotted back into the forest, to the great relief of One Eye, who trotted a little to the fore until they were well within the shelter of the trees.

As they slid along, noiseless as shadows, in the moonlight, they came upon a run-way.  Both noses went down to the footprints in the snow.  These footprints were very fresh.  One Eye ran ahead cautiously, his mate at his heels.  The broad pads of their feet were spread wide and in contact with the snow were like velvet.  One Eye caught sight of a dim movement of white in the midst of the white.  His sliding gait had been deceptively swift, but it was as nothing to the speed at which he now ran.  Before him was bounding the faint patch of white he had discovered.

They were running along a narrow alley flanked on either side by a growth of young spruce.  Through the trees the mouth of the alley could be seen, opening out on a moonlit glade.  Old One Eye was rapidly overhauling the fleeing shape of white.  Bound by bound he gained.  Now he was upon it.  One leap more and his teeth would be sinking into it.  But that leap was never made.  High in the air, and straight up, soared the shape of white, now a struggling snowshoe rabbit that leaped and bounded, executing a fantastic dance there above him in the air and never once returning to earth.

One Eye sprang back with a snort of sudden fright, then shrank down to the snow and crouched, snarling threats at this thing of fear he did not understand.  But the she-wolf coolly thrust past him.  She poised for a moment, then sprang for the dancing rabbit.  She, too, soared high, but not so high as the quarry, and her teeth clipped emptily together with a metallic snap.  She made another leap, and another.

Her mate had slowly relaxed from his crouch and was watching her.  He now evinced displeasure at her repeated failures, and himself made a mighty spring upward.  His teeth closed upon the rabbit, and he bore it back to earth with him.  But at the same time there was a suspicious crackling movement beside him, and his astonished eye saw a young spruce sapling bending down above him to strike him.  His jaws let go their grip, and he leaped backward to escape this strange danger, his lips drawn back from his fangs, his throat snarling, every hair bristling with rage and fright.  And in that moment the sapling reared its slender length upright and the rabbit soared dancing in the air again.

The she-wolf was angry.  She sank her fangs into her mate’s shoulder in reproof; and he, frightened, unaware of what constituted this new onslaught, struck back ferociously and in still greater fright, ripping down the side of the she-wolf’s muzzle.  For him to resent such reproof was equally unexpected to her, and she sprang upon him in snarling indignation.  Then he discovered his mistake and tried to placate her.  But she proceeded to punish him roundly, until he gave over all attempts at placation, and whirled in a circle, his head away from her, his shoulders receiving the punishment of her teeth.

In the meantime the rabbit danced above them in the air.  The she-wolf sat down in the snow, and old One Eye, now more in fear of his mate than of the mysterious sapling, again sprang for the rabbit.  As he sank back with it between his teeth, he kept his eye on the sapling.  As before, it followed him back to earth.  He crouched down under the impending blow, his hair bristling, but his teeth still keeping tight hold of the rabbit.  But the blow did not fall.  The sapling remained bent above him.  When he moved it moved, and he growled at it through his clenched jaws; when he remained still, it remained still, and he concluded it was safer to continue remaining still.  Yet the warm blood of the rabbit tasted good in his mouth.

It was his mate who relieved him from the quandary in which he found himself.  She took the rabbit from him, and while the sapling swayed and teetered threateningly above her she calmly gnawed off the rabbit’s head.  At once the sapling shot up, and after that gave no more trouble, remaining in the decorous and perpendicular position in which nature had intended it to grow.  Then, between them, the she-wolf and One Eye devoured the game which the mysterious sapling had caught for them.

There were other run-ways and alleys where rabbits were hanging in the air, and the wolf-pair prospected them all, the she-wolf leading the way, old One Eye following and observant, learning the method of robbing snares—a knowledge destined to stand him in good stead in the days to come.
CHAPTER II—THE LAIR

For two days the she-wolf and One Eye hung about the Indian camp.  He was worried and apprehensive, yet the camp lured his mate and she was loath to depart.  But when, one morning, the air was rent with the report of a rifle close at hand, and a bullet smashed against a tree trunk several inches from One Eye’s head, they hesitated no more, but went off on a long, swinging lope that put quick miles between them and the danger.

They did not go far—a couple of days’ journey.  The she-wolf’s need to find the thing for which she searched had now become imperative.  She was getting very heavy, and could run but slowly.  Once, in the pursuit of a rabbit, which she ordinarily would have caught with ease, she gave over and lay down and rested.  One Eye came to her; but when he touched her neck gently with his muzzle she snapped at him with such quick fierceness that he tumbled over backward and cut a ridiculous figure in his effort to escape her teeth.  Her temper was now shorter than ever; but he had become more patient than ever and more solicitous.

And then she found the thing for which she sought.  It was a few miles up a small stream that in the summer time flowed into the Mackenzie, but that then was frozen over and frozen down to its rocky bottom—a dead stream of solid white from source to mouth.  The she-wolf was trotting wearily along, her mate well in advance, when she came upon the overhanging, high clay-bank.  She turned aside and trotted over to it.  The wear and tear of spring storms and melting snows had underwashed the bank and in one place had made a small cave out of a narrow fissure.

She paused at the mouth of the cave and looked the wall over carefully.  Then, on one side and the other, she ran along the base of the wall to where its abrupt bulk merged from the softer-lined landscape.  Returning to the cave, she entered its narrow mouth.  For a short three feet she was compelled to crouch, then the walls widened and rose higher in a little round chamber nearly six feet in diameter.  The roof barely cleared her head.  It was dry and cosey.  She inspected it with painstaking care, while One Eye, who had returned, stood in the entrance and patiently watched her.  She dropped her head, with her nose to the ground and directed toward a point near to her closely bunched feet, and around this point she circled several times; then, with a tired sigh that was almost a grunt, she curled her body in, relaxed her legs, and dropped down, her head toward the entrance.  One Eye, with pointed, interested ears, laughed at her, and beyond, outlined against the white light, she could see the brush of his tail waving good-naturedly.  Her own ears, with a snuggling movement, laid their sharp points backward and down against the head for a moment, while her mouth opened and her tongue lolled peaceably out, and in this way she expressed that she was pleased and satisfied.

One Eye was hungry.  Though he lay down in the entrance and slept, his sleep was fitful.  He kept awaking and cocking his ears at the bright world without, where the April sun was blazing across the snow.  When he dozed, upon his ears would steal the faint whispers of hidden trickles of running water, and he would rouse and listen intently.  The sun had come back, and all the awakening Northland world was calling to him.  Life was stirring.  The feel of spring was in the air, the feel of growing life under the snow, of sap ascending in the trees, of buds bursting the shackles of the frost.

He cast anxious glances at his mate, but she showed no desire to get up.  He looked outside, and half a dozen snow-birds fluttered across his field of vision.  He started to get up, then looked back to his mate again, and settled down and dozed.  A shrill and minute singing stole upon his hearing.  Once, and twice, he sleepily brushed his nose with his paw.  Then he woke up.  There, buzzing in the air at the tip of his nose, was a lone mosquito.  It was a full-grown mosquito, one that had lain frozen in a dry log all winter and that had now been thawed out by the sun.  He could resist the call of the world no longer.  Besides, he was hungry.

He crawled over to his mate and tried to persuade her to get up.  But she only snarled at him, and he walked out alone into the bright sunshine to find the snow-surface soft under foot and the travelling difficult.  He went up the frozen bed of the stream, where the snow, shaded by the trees, was yet hard and crystalline.  He was gone eight hours, and he came back through the darkness hungrier than when he had started.  He had found game, but he had not caught it.  He had broken through the melting snow crust, and wallowed, while the snowshoe rabbits had skimmed along on top lightly as ever.

He paused at the mouth of the cave with a sudden shock of suspicion.  Faint, strange sounds came from within.  They were sounds not made by his mate, and yet they were remotely familiar.  He bellied cautiously inside and was met by a warning snarl from the she-wolf.  This he received without perturbation, though he obeyed it by keeping his distance; but he remained interested in the other sounds—faint, muffled sobbings and slubberings.

His mate warned him irritably away, and he curled up and slept in the entrance.  When morning came and a dim light pervaded the lair, he again sought after the source of the remotely familiar sounds.  There was a new note in his mate’s warning snarl.  It was a jealous note, and he was very careful in keeping a respectful distance.  Nevertheless, he made out, sheltering between her legs against the length of her body, five strange little bundles of life, very feeble, very helpless, making tiny whimpering noises, with eyes that did not open to the light.  He was surprised.  It was not the first time in his long and successful life that this thing had happened.  It had happened many times, yet each time it was as fresh a surprise as ever to him.

His mate looked at him anxiously.  Every little while she emitted a low growl, and at times, when it seemed to her he approached too near, the growl shot up in her throat to a sharp snarl.  Of her own experience she had no memory of the thing happening; but in her instinct, which was the experience of all the mothers of wolves, there lurked a memory of fathers that had eaten their new-born and helpless progeny.  It manifested itself as a fear strong within her, that made her prevent One Eye from more closely inspecting the cubs he had fathered.

But there was no danger.  Old One Eye was feeling the urge of an impulse, that was, in turn, an instinct that had come down to him from all the fathers of wolves.  He did not question it, nor puzzle over it.  It was there, in the fibre of his being; and it was the most natural thing in the world that he should obey it by turning his back on his new-born family and by trotting out and away on the meat-trail whereby he lived.

Five or six miles from the lair, the stream divided, its forks going off among the mountains at a right angle.  Here, leading up the left fork, he came upon a fresh track.  He smelled it and found it so recent that he crouched swiftly, and looked in the direction in which it disappeared.  Then he turned deliberately and took the right fork.  The footprint was much larger than the one his own feet made, and he knew that in the wake of such a trail there was little meat for him.

Half a mile up the right fork, his quick ears caught the sound of gnawing teeth.  He stalked the quarry and found it to be a porcupine, standing upright against a tree and trying his teeth on the bark.  One Eye approached carefully but hopelessly.  He knew the breed, though he had never met it so far north before; and never in his long life had porcupine served him for a meal.  But he had long since learned that there was such a thing as Chance, or Opportunity, and he continued to draw near.  There was never any telling what might happen, for with live things events were somehow always happening differently.

The porcupine rolled itself into a ball, radiating long, sharp needles in all directions that defied attack.  In his youth One Eye had once sniffed too near a similar, apparently inert ball of quills, and had the tail flick out suddenly in his face.  One quill he had carried away in his muzzle, where it had remained for weeks, a rankling flame, until it finally worked out.  So he lay down, in a comfortable crouching position, his nose fully a foot away, and out of the line of the tail.  Thus he waited, keeping perfectly quiet.  There was no telling.  Something might happen.  The porcupine might unroll.  There might be opportunity for a deft and ripping thrust of paw into the tender, unguarded belly.

But at the end of half an hour he arose, growled wrathfully at the motionless ball, and trotted on.  He had waited too often and futilely in the past for porcupines to unroll, to waste any more time.  He continued up the right fork.  The day wore along, and nothing rewarded his hunt.

The urge of his awakened instinct of fatherhood was strong upon him.  He must find meat.  In the afternoon he blundered upon a ptarmigan.  He came out of a thicket and found himself face to face with the slow-witted bird.  It was sitting on a log, not a foot beyond the end of his nose.  Each saw the other.  The bird made a startled rise, but he struck it with his paw, and smashed it down to earth, then pounced upon it, and caught it in his teeth as it scuttled across the snow trying to rise in the air again.  As his teeth crunched through the tender flesh and fragile bones, he began naturally to eat.  Then he remembered, and, turning on the back-track, started for home, carrying the ptarmigan in his mouth.

A mile above the forks, running velvet-footed as was his custom, a gliding shadow that cautiously prospected each new vista of the trail, he came upon later imprints of the large tracks he had discovered in the early morning.  As the track led his way, he followed, prepared to meet the maker of it at every turn of the stream.

He slid his head around a corner of rock, where began an unusually large bend in the stream, and his quick eyes made out something that sent him crouching swiftly down.  It was the maker of the track, a large female lynx.  She was crouching as he had crouched once that day, in front of her the tight-rolled ball of quills.  If he had been a gliding shadow before, he now became the ghost of such a shadow, as he crept and circled around, and came up well to leeward of the silent, motionless pair.

He lay down in the snow, depositing the ptarmigan beside him, and with eyes peering through the needles of a low-growing spruce he watched the play of life before him—the waiting lynx and the waiting porcupine, each intent on life; and, such was the curiousness of the game, the way of life for one lay in the eating of the other, and the way of life for the other lay in being not eaten.  While old One Eye, the wolf crouching in the covert, played his part, too, in the game, waiting for some strange freak of Chance, that might help him on the meat-trail which was his way of life.

Half an hour passed, an hour; and nothing happened.  The ball of quills might have been a stone for all it moved; the lynx might have been frozen to marble; and old One Eye might have been dead.  Yet all three animals were keyed to a tenseness of living that was almost painful, and scarcely ever would it come to them to be more alive than they were then in their seeming petrifaction.

One Eye moved slightly and peered forth with increased eagerness.  Something was happening.  The porcupine had at last decided that its enemy had gone away.  Slowly, cautiously, it was unrolling its ball of impregnable armour.  It was agitated by no tremor of anticipation.  Slowly, slowly, the bristling ball straightened out and lengthened.  One Eye watching, felt a sudden moistness in his mouth and a drooling of saliva, involuntary, excited by the living meat that was spreading itself like a repast before him.

Not quite entirely had the porcupine unrolled when it discovered its enemy.  In that instant the lynx struck.  The blow was like a flash of light.  The paw, with rigid claws curving like talons, shot under the tender belly and came back with a swift ripping movement.  Had the porcupine been entirely unrolled, or had it not discovered its enemy a fraction of a second before the blow was struck, the paw would have escaped unscathed; but a side-flick of the tail sank sharp quills into it as it was withdrawn.

Everything had happened at once—the blow, the counter-blow, the squeal of agony from the porcupine, the big cat’s squall of sudden hurt and astonishment.  One Eye half arose in his excitement, his ears up, his tail straight out and quivering behind him.  The lynx’s bad temper got the best of her.  She sprang savagely at the thing that had hurt her.  But the porcupine, squealing and grunting, with disrupted anatomy trying feebly to roll up into its ball-protection, flicked out its tail again, and again the big cat squalled with hurt and astonishment.  Then she fell to backing away and sneezing, her nose bristling with quills like a monstrous pin-cushion.  She brushed her nose with her paws, trying to dislodge the fiery darts, thrust it into the snow, and rubbed it against twigs and branches, and all the time leaping about, ahead, sidewise, up and down, in a frenzy of pain and fright.

She sneezed continually, and her stub of a tail was doing its best toward lashing about by giving quick, violent jerks.  She quit her antics, and quieted down for a long minute.  One Eye watched.  And even he could not repress a start and an involuntary bristling of hair along his back when she suddenly leaped, without warning, straight up in the air, at the same time emitting a long and most terrible squall.  Then she sprang away, up the trail, squalling with every leap she made.

It was not until her racket had faded away in the distance and died out that One Eye ventured forth.  He walked as delicately as though all the snow were carpeted with porcupine quills, erect and ready to pierce the soft pads of his feet.  The porcupine met his approach with a furious squealing and a clashing of its long teeth.  It had managed to roll up in a ball again, but it was not quite the old compact ball; its muscles were too much torn for that.  It had been ripped almost in half, and was still bleeding profusely.

One Eye scooped out mouthfuls of the blood-soaked snow, and chewed and tasted and swallowed.  This served as a relish, and his hunger increased mightily; but he was too old in the world to forget his caution.  He waited.  He lay down and waited, while the porcupine grated its teeth and uttered grunts and sobs and occasional sharp little squeals.  In a little while, One Eye noticed that the quills were drooping and that a great quivering had set up.  The quivering came to an end suddenly.  There was a final defiant clash of the long teeth.  Then all the quills drooped quite down, and the body relaxed and moved no more.

With a nervous, shrinking paw, One Eye stretched out the porcupine to its full length and turned it over on its back.  Nothing had happened.  It was surely dead.  He studied it intently for a moment, then took a careful grip with his teeth and started off down the stream, partly carrying, partly dragging the porcupine, with head turned to the side so as to avoid stepping on the prickly mass.  He recollected something, dropped the burden, and trotted back to where he had left the ptarmigan.  He did not hesitate a moment.  He knew clearly what was to be done, and this he did by promptly eating the ptarmigan.  Then he returned and took up his burden.

When he dragged the result of his day’s hunt into the cave, the she-wolf inspected it, turned her muzzle to him, and lightly licked him on the neck.  But the next instant she was warning him away from the cubs with a snarl that was less harsh than usual and that was more apologetic than menacing.  Her instinctive fear of the father of her progeny was toning down.  He was behaving as a wolf-father should, and manifesting no unholy desire to devour the young lives she had brought into the world.
CHAPTER III—THE GREY CUB

He was different from his brothers and sisters.  Their hair already betrayed the reddish hue inherited from their mother, the she-wolf; while he alone, in this particular, took after his father.  He was the one little grey cub of the litter.  He had bred true to the straight wolf-stock—in fact, he had bred true to old One Eye himself, physically, with but a single exception, and that was he had two eyes to his father’s one.

The grey cub’s eyes had not been open long, yet already he could see with steady clearness.  And while his eyes were still closed, he had felt, tasted, and smelled.  He knew his two brothers and his two sisters very well.  He had begun to romp with them in a feeble, awkward way, and even to squabble, his little throat vibrating with a queer rasping noise (the forerunner of the growl), as he worked himself into a passion.  And long before his eyes had opened he had learned by touch, taste, and smell to know his mother—a fount of warmth and liquid food and tenderness.  She possessed a gentle, caressing tongue that soothed him when it passed over his soft little body, and that impelled him to snuggle close against her and to doze off to sleep.

Most of the first month of his life had been passed thus in sleeping; but now he could see quite well, and he stayed awake for longer periods of time, and he was coming to learn his world quite well.  His world was gloomy; but he did not know that, for he knew no other world.  It was dim-lighted; but his eyes had never had to adjust themselves to any other light.  His world was very small.  Its limits were the walls of the lair; but as he had no knowledge of the wide world outside, he was never oppressed by the narrow confines of his existence.

But he had early discovered that one wall of his world was different from the rest.  This was the mouth of the cave and the source of light.  He had discovered that it was different from the other walls long before he had any thoughts of his own, any conscious volitions.  It had been an irresistible attraction before ever his eyes opened and looked upon it.  The light from it had beat upon his sealed lids, and the eyes and the optic nerves had pulsated to little, sparklike flashes, warm-coloured and strangely pleasing.  The life of his body, and of every fibre of his body, the life that was the very substance of his body and that was apart from his own personal life, had yearned toward this light and urged his body toward it in the same way that the cunning chemistry of a plant urges it toward the sun.

Always, in the beginning, before his conscious life dawned, he had crawled toward the mouth of the cave.  And in this his brothers and sisters were one with him.  Never, in that period, did any of them crawl toward the dark corners of the back-wall.  The light drew them as if they were plants; the chemistry of the life that composed them demanded the light as a necessity of being; and their little puppet-bodies crawled blindly and chemically, like the tendrils of a vine.  Later on, when each developed individuality and became personally conscious of impulsions and desires, the attraction of the light increased.  They were always crawling and sprawling toward it, and being driven back from it by their mother.

It was in this way that the grey cub learned other attributes of his mother than the soft, soothing, tongue.  In his insistent crawling toward the light, he discovered in her a nose that with a sharp nudge administered rebuke, and later, a paw, that crushed him down and rolled him over and over with swift, calculating stroke.  Thus he learned hurt; and on top of it he learned to avoid hurt, first, by not incurring the risk of it; and second, when he had incurred the risk, by dodging and by retreating.  These were conscious actions, and were the results of his first generalisations upon the world.  Before that he had recoiled automatically from hurt, as he had crawled automatically toward the light.  After that he recoiled from hurt because he knew that it was hurt.

He was a fierce little cub.  So were his brothers and sisters.  It was to be expected.  He was a carnivorous animal.  He came of a breed of meat-killers and meat-eaters.  His father and mother lived wholly upon meat.  The milk he had sucked with his first flickering life, was milk transformed directly from meat, and now, at a month old, when his eyes had been open for but a week, he was beginning himself to eat meat—meat half-digested by the she-wolf and disgorged for the five growing cubs that already made too great demand upon her breast.

But he was, further, the fiercest of the litter.  He could make a louder rasping growl than any of them.  His tiny rages were much more terrible than theirs.  It was he that first learned the trick of rolling a fellow-cub over with a cunning paw-stroke.  And it was he that first gripped another cub by the ear and pulled and tugged and growled through jaws tight-clenched.  And certainly it was he that caused the mother the most trouble in keeping her litter from the mouth of the cave.

The fascination of the light for the grey cub increased from day to day.  He was perpetually departing on yard-long adventures toward the cave’s entrance, and as perpetually being driven back.  Only he did not know it for an entrance.  He did not know anything about entrances—passages whereby one goes from one place to another place.  He did not know any other place, much less of a way to get there.  So to him the entrance of the cave was a wall—a wall of light.  As the sun was to the outside dweller, this wall was to him the sun of his world.  It attracted him as a candle attracts a moth.  He was always striving to attain it.  The life that was so swiftly expanding within him, urged him continually toward the wall of light.  The life that was within him knew that it was the one way out, the way he was predestined to tread.  But he himself did not know anything about it.  He did not know there was any outside at all.

There was one strange thing about this wall of light.  His father (he had already come to recognise his father as the one other dweller in the world, a creature like his mother, who slept near the light and was a bringer of meat)—his father had a way of walking right into the white far wall and disappearing.  The grey cub could not understand this.  Though never permitted by his mother to approach that wall, he had approached the other walls, and encountered hard obstruction on the end of his tender nose.  This hurt.  And after several such adventures, he left the walls alone.  Without thinking about it, he accepted this disappearing into the wall as a peculiarity of his father, as milk and half-digested meat were peculiarities of his mother.

In fact, the grey cub was not given to thinking—at least, to the kind of thinking customary of men.  His brain worked in dim ways.  Yet his conclusions were as sharp and distinct as those achieved by men.  He had a method of accepting things, without questioning the why and wherefore.  In reality, this was the act of classification.  He was never disturbed over why a thing happened.  How it happened was sufficient for him.  Thus, when he had bumped his nose on the back-wall a few times, he accepted that he would not disappear into walls.  In the same way he accepted that his father could disappear into walls.  But he was not in the least disturbed by desire to find out the reason for the difference between his father and himself.  Logic and physics were no part of his mental make-up.

Like most creatures of the Wild, he early experienced famine.  There came a time when not only did the meat-supply cease, but the milk no longer came from his mother’s breast.  At first, the cubs whimpered and cried, but for the most part they slept.  It was not long before they were reduced to a coma of hunger.  There were no more spats and squabbles, no more tiny rages nor attempts at growling; while the adventures toward the far white wall ceased altogether.  The cubs slept, while the life that was in them flickered and died down.

One Eye was desperate.  He ranged far and wide, and slept but little in the lair that had now become cheerless and miserable.  The she-wolf, too, left her litter and went out in search of meat.  In the first days after the birth of the cubs, One Eye had journeyed several times back to the Indian camp and robbed the rabbit snares; but, with the melting of the snow and the opening of the streams, the Indian camp had moved away, and that source of supply was closed to him.

When the grey cub came back to life and again took interest in the far white wall, he found that the population of his world had been reduced.  Only one sister remained to him.  The rest were gone.  As he grew stronger, he found himself compelled to play alone, for the sister no longer lifted her head nor moved about.  His little body rounded out with the meat he now ate; but the food had come too late for her.  She slept continuously, a tiny skeleton flung round with skin in which the flame flickered lower and lower and at last went out.

Then there came a time when the grey cub no longer saw his father appearing and disappearing in the wall nor lying down asleep in the entrance.  This had happened at the end of a second and less severe famine.  The she-wolf knew why One Eye never came back, but there was no way by which she could tell what she had seen to the grey cub.  Hunting herself for meat, up the left fork of the stream where lived the lynx, she had followed a day-old trail of One Eye.  And she had found him, or what remained of him, at the end of the trail.  There were many signs of the battle that had been fought, and of the lynx’s withdrawal to her lair after having won the victory.  Before she went away, the she-wolf had found this lair, but the signs told her that the lynx was inside, and she had not dared to venture in.

After that, the she-wolf in her hunting avoided the left fork.  For she knew that in the lynx’s lair was a litter of kittens, and she knew the lynx for a fierce, bad-tempered creature and a terrible fighter.  It was all very well for half a dozen wolves to drive a lynx, spitting and bristling, up a tree; but it was quite a different matter for a lone wolf to encounter a lynx—especially when the lynx was known to have a litter of hungry kittens at her back.

But the Wild is the Wild, and motherhood is motherhood, at all times fiercely protective whether in the Wild or out of it; and the time was to come when the she-wolf, for her grey cub’s sake, would venture the left fork, and the lair in the rocks, and the lynx’s wrath.
CHAPTER IV—THE WALL OF THE WORLD

By the time his mother began leaving the cave on hunting expeditions, the cub had learned well the law that forbade his approaching the entrance.  Not only had this law been forcibly and many times impressed on him by his mother’s nose and paw, but in him the instinct of fear was developing.  Never, in his brief cave-life, had he encountered anything of which to be afraid.  Yet fear was in him.  It had come down to him from a remote ancestry through a thousand thousand lives.  It was a heritage he had received directly from One Eye and the she-wolf; but to them, in turn, it had been passed down through all the generations of wolves that had gone before.  Fear!—that legacy of the Wild which no animal may escape nor exchange for pottage.

So the grey cub knew fear, though he knew not the stuff of which fear was made.  Possibly he accepted it as one of the restrictions of life.  For he had already learned that there were such restrictions.  Hunger he had known; and when he could not appease his hunger he had felt restriction.  The hard obstruction of the cave-wall, the sharp nudge of his mother’s nose, the smashing stroke of her paw, the hunger unappeased of several famines, had borne in upon him that all was not freedom in the world, that to life there was limitations and restraints.  These limitations and restraints were laws.  To be obedient to them was to escape hurt and make for happiness.

He did not reason the question out in this man fashion.  He merely classified the things that hurt and the things that did not hurt.  And after such classification he avoided the things that hurt, the restrictions and restraints, in order to enjoy the satisfactions and the remunerations of life.

Thus it was that in obedience to the law laid down by his mother, and in obedience to the law of that unknown and nameless thing, fear, he kept away from the mouth of the cave.  It remained to him a white wall of light.  When his mother was absent, he slept most of the time, while during the intervals that he was awake he kept very quiet, suppressing the whimpering cries that tickled in his throat and strove for noise.

Once, lying awake, he heard a strange sound in the white wall.  He did not know that it was a wolverine, standing outside, all a-trembling with its own daring, and cautiously scenting out the contents of the cave.  The cub knew only that the sniff was strange, a something unclassified, therefore unknown and terrible—for the unknown was one of the chief elements that went into the making of fear.

The hair bristled upon the grey cub’s back, but it bristled silently.  How was he to know that this thing that sniffed was a thing at which to bristle?  It was not born of any knowledge of his, yet it was the visible expression of the fear that was in him, and for which, in his own life, there was no accounting.  But fear was accompanied by another instinct—that of concealment.  The cub was in a frenzy of terror, yet he lay without movement or sound, frozen, petrified into immobility, to all appearances dead.  His mother, coming home, growled as she smelt the wolverine’s track, and bounded into the cave and licked and nozzled him with undue vehemence of affection.  And the cub felt that somehow he had escaped a great hurt.

But there were other forces at work in the cub, the greatest of which was growth.  Instinct and law demanded of him obedience.  But growth demanded disobedience.  His mother and fear impelled him to keep away from the white wall.  Growth is life, and life is for ever destined to make for light.  So there was no damming up the tide of life that was rising within him—rising with every mouthful of meat he swallowed, with every breath he drew.  In the end, one day, fear and obedience were swept away by the rush of life, and the cub straddled and sprawled toward the entrance.

Unlike any other wall with which he had had experience, this wall seemed to recede from him as he approached.  No hard surface collided with the tender little nose he thrust out tentatively before him.  The substance of the wall seemed as permeable and yielding as light.  And as condition, in his eyes, had the seeming of form, so he entered into what had been wall to him and bathed in the substance that composed it.

It was bewildering.  He was sprawling through solidity.  And ever the light grew brighter.  Fear urged him to go back, but growth drove him on.  Suddenly he found himself at the mouth of the cave.  The wall, inside which he had thought himself, as suddenly leaped back before him to an immeasurable distance.  The light had become painfully bright.  He was dazzled by it.  Likewise he was made dizzy by this abrupt and tremendous extension of space.  Automatically, his eyes were adjusting themselves to the brightness, focusing themselves to meet the increased distance of objects.  At first, the wall had leaped beyond his vision.  He now saw it again; but it had taken upon itself a remarkable remoteness.  Also, its appearance had changed.  It was now a variegated wall, composed of the trees that fringed the stream, the opposing mountain that towered above the trees, and the sky that out-towered the mountain.

A great fear came upon him.  This was more of the terrible unknown.  He crouched down on the lip of the cave and gazed out on the world.  He was very much afraid.  Because it was unknown, it was hostile to him.  Therefore the hair stood up on end along his back and his lips wrinkled weakly in an attempt at a ferocious and intimidating snarl.  Out of his puniness and fright he challenged and menaced the whole wide world.

Nothing happened.  He continued to gaze, and in his interest he forgot to snarl.  Also, he forgot to be afraid.  For the time, fear had been routed by growth, while growth had assumed the guise of curiosity.  He began to notice near objects—an open portion of the stream that flashed in the sun, the blasted pine-tree that stood at the base of the slope, and the slope itself, that ran right up to him and ceased two feet beneath the lip of the cave on which he crouched.

Now the grey cub had lived all his days on a level floor.  He had never experienced the hurt of a fall.  He did not know what a fall was.  So he stepped boldly out upon the air.  His hind-legs still rested on the cave-lip, so he fell forward head downward.  The earth struck him a harsh blow on the nose that made him yelp.  Then he began rolling down the slope, over and over.  He was in a panic of terror.  The unknown had caught him at last.  It had gripped savagely hold of him and was about to wreak upon him some terrific hurt.  Growth was now routed by fear, and he ki-yi’d like any frightened puppy.

The unknown bore him on he knew not to what frightful hurt, and he yelped and ki-yi’d unceasingly.  This was a different proposition from crouching in frozen fear while the unknown lurked just alongside.  Now the unknown had caught tight hold of him.  Silence would do no good.  Besides, it was not fear, but terror, that convulsed him.

But the slope grew more gradual, and its base was grass-covered.  Here the cub lost momentum.  When at last he came to a stop, he gave one last agonised yell and then a long, whimpering wail.  Also, and quite as a matter of course, as though in his life he had already made a thousand toilets, he proceeded to lick away the dry clay that soiled him.

After that he sat up and gazed about him, as might the first man of the earth who landed upon Mars.  The cub had broken through the wall of the world, the unknown had let go its hold of him, and here he was without hurt.  But the first man on Mars would have experienced less unfamiliarity than did he.  Without any antecedent knowledge, without any warning whatever that such existed, he found himself an explorer in a totally new world.

Now that the terrible unknown had let go of him, he forgot that the unknown had any terrors.  He was aware only of curiosity in all the things about him.  He inspected the grass beneath him, the moss-berry plant just beyond, and the dead trunk of the blasted pine that stood on the edge of an open space among the trees.  A squirrel, running around the base of the trunk, came full upon him, and gave him a great fright.  He cowered down and snarled.  But the squirrel was as badly scared.  It ran up the tree, and from a point of safety chattered back savagely.

This helped the cub’s courage, and though the woodpecker he next encountered gave him a start, he proceeded confidently on his way.  Such was his confidence, that when a moose-bird impudently hopped up to him, he reached out at it with a playful paw.  The result was a sharp peck on the end of his nose that made him cower down and ki-yi.  The noise he made was too much for the moose-bird, who sought safety in flight.

But the cub was learning.  His misty little mind had already made an unconscious classification.  There were live things and things not alive.  Also, he must watch out for the live things.  The things not alive remained always in one place, but the live things moved about, and there was no telling what they might do.  The thing to expect of them was the unexpected, and for this he must be prepared.

He travelled very clumsily.  He ran into sticks and things.  A twig that he thought a long way off, would the next instant hit him on the nose or rake along his ribs.  There were inequalities of surface.  Sometimes he overstepped and stubbed his nose.  Quite as often he understepped and stubbed his feet.  Then there were the pebbles and stones that turned under him when he trod upon them; and from them he came to know that the things not alive were not all in the same state of stable equilibrium as was his cave—also, that small things not alive were more liable than large things to fall down or turn over.  But with every mishap he was learning.  The longer he walked, the better he walked.  He was adjusting himself.  He was learning to calculate his own muscular movements, to know his physical limitations, to measure distances between objects, and between objects and himself.

His was the luck of the beginner.  Born to be a hunter of meat (though he did not know it), he blundered upon meat just outside his own cave-door on his first foray into the world.  It was by sheer blundering that he chanced upon the shrewdly hidden ptarmigan nest.  He fell into it.  He had essayed to walk along the trunk of a fallen pine.  The rotten bark gave way under his feet, and with a despairing yelp he pitched down the rounded crescent, smashed through the leafage and stalks of a small bush, and in the heart of the bush, on the ground, fetched up in the midst of seven ptarmigan chicks.

They made noises, and at first he was frightened at them.  Then he perceived that they were very little, and he became bolder.  They moved.  He placed his paw on one, and its movements were accelerated.  This was a source of enjoyment to him.  He smelled it.  He picked it up in his mouth.  It struggled and tickled his tongue.  At the same time he was made aware of a sensation of hunger.  His jaws closed together.  There was a crunching of fragile bones, and warm blood ran in his mouth.  The taste of it was good.  This was meat, the same as his mother gave him, only it was alive between his teeth and therefore better.  So he ate the ptarmigan.  Nor did he stop till he had devoured the whole brood.  Then he licked his chops in quite the same way his mother did, and began to crawl out of the bush.

He encountered a feathered whirlwind.  He was confused and blinded by the rush of it and the beat of angry wings.  He hid his head between his paws and yelped.  The blows increased.  The mother ptarmigan was in a fury.  Then he became angry.  He rose up, snarling, striking out with his paws.  He sank his tiny teeth into one of the wings and pulled and tugged sturdily.  The ptarmigan struggled against him, showering blows upon him with her free wing.  It was his first battle.  He was elated.  He forgot all about the unknown.  He no longer was afraid of anything.  He was fighting, tearing at a live thing that was striking at him.  Also, this live thing was meat.  The lust to kill was on him.  He had just destroyed little live things.  He would now destroy a big live thing.  He was too busy and happy to know that he was happy.  He was thrilling and exulting in ways new to him and greater to him than any he had known before.

He held on to the wing and growled between his tight-clenched teeth.  The ptarmigan dragged him out of the bush.  When she turned and tried to drag him back into the bush’s shelter, he pulled her away from it and on into the open.  And all the time she was making outcry and striking with her free wing, while feathers were flying like a snow-fall.  The pitch to which he was aroused was tremendous.  All the fighting blood of his breed was up in him and surging through him.  This was living, though he did not know it.  He was realising his own meaning in the world; he was doing that for which he was made—killing meat and battling to kill it.  He was justifying his existence, than which life can do no greater; for life achieves its summit when it does to the uttermost that which it was equipped to do.

After a time, the ptarmigan ceased her struggling.  He still held her by the wing, and they lay on the ground and looked at each other.  He tried to growl threateningly, ferociously.  She pecked on his nose, which by now, what of previous adventures was sore.  He winced but held on.  She pecked him again and again.  From wincing he went to whimpering.  He tried to back away from her, oblivious to the fact that by his hold on her he dragged her after him.  A rain of pecks fell on his ill-used nose.  The flood of fight ebbed down in him, and, releasing his prey, he turned tail and scampered on across the open in inglorious retreat.

He lay down to rest on the other side of the open, near the edge of the bushes, his tongue lolling out, his chest heaving and panting, his nose still hurting him and causing him to continue his whimper.  But as he lay there, suddenly there came to him a feeling as of something terrible impending.  The unknown with all its terrors rushed upon him, and he shrank back instinctively into the shelter of the bush.  As he did so, a draught of air fanned him, and a large, winged body swept ominously and silently past.  A hawk, driving down out of the blue, had barely missed him.

While he lay in the bush, recovering from his fright and peering fearfully out, the mother-ptarmigan on the other side of the open space fluttered out of the ravaged nest.  It was because of her loss that she paid no attention to the winged bolt of the sky.  But the cub saw, and it was a warning and a lesson to him—the swift downward swoop of the hawk, the short skim of its body just above the ground, the strike of its talons in the body of the ptarmigan, the ptarmigan’s squawk of agony and fright, and the hawk’s rush upward into the blue, carrying the ptarmigan away with it.

It was a long time before the cub left its shelter.  He had learned much.  Live things were meat.  They were good to eat.  Also, live things when they were large enough, could give hurt.  It was better to eat small live things like ptarmigan chicks, and to let alone large live things like ptarmigan hens.  Nevertheless he felt a little prick of ambition, a sneaking desire to have another battle with that ptarmigan hen—only the hawk had carried her away.  May be there were other ptarmigan hens.  He would go and see.

He came down a shelving bank to the stream.  He had never seen water before.  The footing looked good.  There were no inequalities of surface.  He stepped boldly out on it; and went down, crying with fear, into the embrace of the unknown.  It was cold, and he gasped, breathing quickly.  The water rushed into his lungs instead of the air that had always accompanied his act of breathing.  The suffocation he experienced was like the pang of death.  To him it signified death.  He had no conscious knowledge of death, but like every animal of the Wild, he possessed the instinct of death.  To him it stood as the greatest of hurts.  It was the very essence of the unknown; it was the sum of the terrors of the unknown, the one culminating and unthinkable catastrophe that could happen to him, about which he knew nothing and about which he feared everything.

He came to the surface, and the sweet air rushed into his open mouth.  He did not go down again.  Quite as though it had been a long-established custom of his he struck out with all his legs and began to swim.  The near bank was a yard away; but he had come up with his back to it, and the first thing his eyes rested upon was the opposite bank, toward which he immediately began to swim.  The stream was a small one, but in the pool it widened out to a score of feet.

Midway in the passage, the current picked up the cub and swept him downstream.  He was caught in the miniature rapid at the bottom of the pool.  Here was little chance for swimming.  The quiet water had become suddenly angry.  Sometimes he was under, sometimes on top.  At all times he was in violent motion, now being turned over or around, and again, being smashed against a rock.  And with every rock he struck, he yelped.  His progress was a series of yelps, from which might have been adduced the number of rocks he encountered.

Below the rapid was a second pool, and here, captured by the eddy, he was gently borne to the bank, and as gently deposited on a bed of gravel.  He crawled frantically clear of the water and lay down.  He had learned some more about the world.  Water was not alive.  Yet it moved.  Also, it looked as solid as the earth, but was without any solidity at all.  His conclusion was that things were not always what they appeared to be.  The cub’s fear of the unknown was an inherited distrust, and it had now been strengthened by experience.  Thenceforth, in the nature of things, he would possess an abiding distrust of appearances.  He would have to learn the reality of a thing before he could put his faith into it.

One other adventure was destined for him that day.  He had recollected that there was such a thing in the world as his mother.  And then there came to him a feeling that he wanted her more than all the rest of the things in the world.  Not only was his body tired with the adventures it had undergone, but his little brain was equally tired.  In all the days he had lived it had not worked so hard as on this one day.  Furthermore, he was sleepy.  So he started out to look for the cave and his mother, feeling at the same time an overwhelming rush of loneliness and helplessness.

He was sprawling along between some bushes, when he heard a sharp intimidating cry.  There was a flash of yellow before his eyes.  He saw a weasel leaping swiftly away from him.  It was a small live thing, and he had no fear.  Then, before him, at his feet, he saw an extremely small live thing, only several inches long, a young weasel, that, like himself, had disobediently gone out adventuring.  It tried to retreat before him.  He turned it over with his paw.  It made a queer, grating noise.  The next moment the flash of yellow reappeared before his eyes.  He heard again the intimidating cry, and at the same instant received a sharp blow on the side of the neck and felt the sharp teeth of the mother-weasel cut into his flesh.

While he yelped and ki-yi’d and scrambled backward, he saw the mother-weasel leap upon her young one and disappear with it into the neighbouring thicket.  The cut of her teeth in his neck still hurt, but his feelings were hurt more grievously, and he sat down and weakly whimpered.  This mother-weasel was so small and so savage.  He was yet to learn that for size and weight the weasel was the most ferocious, vindictive, and terrible of all the killers of the Wild.  But a portion of this knowledge was quickly to be his.

He was still whimpering when the mother-weasel reappeared.  She did not rush him, now that her young one was safe.  She approached more cautiously, and the cub had full opportunity to observe her lean, snakelike body, and her head, erect, eager, and snake-like itself.  Her sharp, menacing cry sent the hair bristling along his back, and he snarled warningly at her.  She came closer and closer.  There was a leap, swifter than his unpractised sight, and the lean, yellow body disappeared for a moment out of the field of his vision.  The next moment she was at his throat, her teeth buried in his hair and flesh.

At first he snarled and tried to fight; but he was very young, and this was only his first day in the world, and his snarl became a whimper, his fight a struggle to escape.  The weasel never relaxed her hold.  She hung on, striving to press down with her teeth to the great vein where his life-blood bubbled.  The weasel was a drinker of blood, and it was ever her preference to drink from the throat of life itself.

The grey cub would have died, and there would have been no story to write about him, had not the she-wolf come bounding through the bushes.  The weasel let go the cub and flashed at the she-wolf’s throat, missing, but getting a hold on the jaw instead.  The she-wolf flirted her head like the snap of a whip, breaking the weasel’s hold and flinging it high in the air.  And, still in the air, the she-wolf’s jaws closed on the lean, yellow body, and the weasel knew death between the crunching teeth.

The cub experienced another access of affection on the part of his mother.  Her joy at finding him seemed even greater than his joy at being found.  She nozzled him and caressed him and licked the cuts made in him by the weasel’s teeth.  Then, between them, mother and cub, they ate the blood-drinker, and after that went back to the cave and slept.
CHAPTER V—THE LAW OF MEAT

The cub’s development was rapid.  He rested for two days, and then ventured forth from the cave again.  It was on this adventure that he found the young weasel whose mother he had helped eat, and he saw to it that the young weasel went the way of its mother.  But on this trip he did not get lost.  When he grew tired, he found his way back to the cave and slept.  And every day thereafter found him out and ranging a wider area.

He began to get accurate measurement of his strength and his weakness, and to know when to be bold and when to be cautious.  He found it expedient to be cautious all the time, except for the rare moments, when, assured of his own intrepidity, he abandoned himself to petty rages and lusts.

He was always a little demon of fury when he chanced upon a stray ptarmigan.  Never did he fail to respond savagely to the chatter of the squirrel he had first met on the blasted pine.  While the sight of a moose-bird almost invariably put him into the wildest of rages; for he never forgot the peck on the nose he had received from the first of that ilk he encountered.

But there were times when even a moose-bird failed to affect him, and those were times when he felt himself to be in danger from some other prowling meat hunter.  He never forgot the hawk, and its moving shadow always sent him crouching into the nearest thicket.  He no longer sprawled and straddled, and already he was developing the gait of his mother, slinking and furtive, apparently without exertion, yet sliding along with a swiftness that was as deceptive as it was imperceptible.

In the matter of meat, his luck had been all in the beginning.  The seven ptarmigan chicks and the baby weasel represented the sum of his killings.  His desire to kill strengthened with the days, and he cherished hungry ambitions for the squirrel that chattered so volubly and always informed all wild creatures that the wolf-cub was approaching.  But as birds flew in the air, squirrels could climb trees, and the cub could only try to crawl unobserved upon the squirrel when it was on the ground.

The cub entertained a great respect for his mother.  She could get meat, and she never failed to bring him his share.  Further, she was unafraid of things.  It did not occur to him that this fearlessness was founded upon experience and knowledge.  Its effect on him was that of an impression of power.  His mother represented power; and as he grew older he felt this power in the sharper admonishment of her paw; while the reproving nudge of her nose gave place to the slash of her fangs.  For this, likewise, he respected his mother.  She compelled obedience from him, and the older he grew the shorter grew her temper.

Famine came again, and the cub with clearer consciousness knew once more the bite of hunger.  The she-wolf ran herself thin in the quest for meat.  She rarely slept any more in the cave, spending most of her time on the meat-trail, and spending it vainly.  This famine was not a long one, but it was severe while it lasted.  The cub found no more milk in his mother’s breast, nor did he get one mouthful of meat for himself.

Before, he had hunted in play, for the sheer joyousness of it; now he hunted in deadly earnestness, and found nothing.  Yet the failure of it accelerated his development.  He studied the habits of the squirrel with greater carefulness, and strove with greater craft to steal upon it and surprise it.  He studied the wood-mice and tried to dig them out of their burrows; and he learned much about the ways of moose-birds and woodpeckers.  And there came a day when the hawk’s shadow did not drive him crouching into the bushes.  He had grown stronger and wiser, and more confident.  Also, he was desperate.  So he sat on his haunches, conspicuously in an open space, and challenged the hawk down out of the sky.  For he knew that there, floating in the blue above him, was meat, the meat his stomach yearned after so insistently.  But the hawk refused to come down and give battle, and the cub crawled away into a thicket and whimpered his disappointment and hunger.

The famine broke.  The she-wolf brought home meat.  It was strange meat, different from any she had ever brought before.  It was a lynx kitten, partly grown, like the cub, but not so large.  And it was all for him.  His mother had satisfied her hunger elsewhere; though he did not know that it was the rest of the lynx litter that had gone to satisfy her.  Nor did he know the desperateness of her deed.  He knew only that the velvet-furred kitten was meat, and he ate and waxed happier with every mouthful.

A full stomach conduces to inaction, and the cub lay in the cave, sleeping against his mother’s side.  He was aroused by her snarling.  Never had he heard her snarl so terribly.  Possibly in her whole life it was the most terrible snarl she ever gave.  There was reason for it, and none knew it better than she.  A lynx’s lair is not despoiled with impunity.  In the full glare of the afternoon light, crouching in the entrance of the cave, the cub saw the lynx-mother.  The hair rippled up along his back at the sight.  Here was fear, and it did not require his instinct to tell him of it.  And if sight alone were not sufficient, the cry of rage the intruder gave, beginning with a snarl and rushing abruptly upward into a hoarse screech, was convincing enough in itself.

The cub felt the prod of the life that was in him, and stood up and snarled valiantly by his mother’s side.  But she thrust him ignominiously away and behind her.  Because of the low-roofed entrance the lynx could not leap in, and when she made a crawling rush of it the she-wolf sprang upon her and pinned her down.  The cub saw little of the battle.  There was a tremendous snarling and spitting and screeching.  The two animals threshed about, the lynx ripping and tearing with her claws and using her teeth as well, while the she-wolf used her teeth alone.

Once, the cub sprang in and sank his teeth into the hind leg of the lynx.  He clung on, growling savagely.  Though he did not know it, by the weight of his body he clogged the action of the leg and thereby saved his mother much damage.  A change in the battle crushed him under both their bodies and wrenched loose his hold.  The next moment the two mothers separated, and, before they rushed together again, the lynx lashed out at the cub with a huge fore-paw that ripped his shoulder open to the bone and sent him hurtling sidewise against the wall.  Then was added to the uproar the cub’s shrill yelp of pain and fright.  But the fight lasted so long that he had time to cry himself out and to experience a second burst of courage; and the end of the battle found him again clinging to a hind-leg and furiously growling between his teeth.

The lynx was dead.  But the she-wolf was very weak and sick.  At first she caressed the cub and licked his wounded shoulder; but the blood she had lost had taken with it her strength, and for all of a day and a night she lay by her dead foe’s side, without movement, scarcely breathing.  For a week she never left the cave, except for water, and then her movements were slow and painful.  At the end of that time the lynx was devoured, while the she-wolf’s wounds had healed sufficiently to permit her to take the meat-trail again.

The cub’s shoulder was stiff and sore, and for some time he limped from the terrible slash he had received.  But the world now seemed changed.  He went about in it with greater confidence, with a feeling of prowess that had not been his in the days before the battle with the lynx.  He had looked upon life in a more ferocious aspect; he had fought; he had buried his teeth in the flesh of a foe; and he had survived.  And because of all this, he carried himself more boldly, with a touch of defiance that was new in him.  He was no longer afraid of minor things, and much of his timidity had vanished, though the unknown never ceased to press upon him with its mysteries and terrors, intangible and ever-menacing.

He began to accompany his mother on the meat-trail, and he saw much of the killing of meat and began to play his part in it.  And in his own dim way he learned the law of meat.  There were two kinds of life—his own kind and the other kind.  His own kind included his mother and himself.  The other kind included all live things that moved.  But the other kind was divided.  One portion was what his own kind killed and ate.  This portion was composed of the non-killers and the small killers.  The other portion killed and ate his own kind, or was killed and eaten by his own kind.  And out of this classification arose the law.  The aim of life was meat.  Life itself was meat.  Life lived on life.  There were the eaters and the eaten.  The law was: EAT OR BE EATEN.  He did not formulate the law in clear, set terms and moralise about it.  He did not even think the law; he merely lived the law without thinking about it at all.

He saw the law operating around him on every side.  He had eaten the ptarmigan chicks.  The hawk had eaten the ptarmigan-mother.  The hawk would also have eaten him.  Later, when he had grown more formidable, he wanted to eat the hawk.  He had eaten the lynx kitten.  The lynx-mother would have eaten him had she not herself been killed and eaten.  And so it went.  The law was being lived about him by all live things, and he himself was part and parcel of the law.  He was a killer.  His only food was meat, live meat, that ran away swiftly before him, or flew into the air, or climbed trees, or hid in the ground, or faced him and fought with him, or turned the tables and ran after him.

Had the cub thought in man-fashion, he might have epitomised life as a voracious appetite and the world as a place wherein ranged a multitude of appetites, pursuing and being pursued, hunting and being hunted, eating and being eaten, all in blindness and confusion, with violence and disorder, a chaos of gluttony and slaughter, ruled over by chance, merciless, planless, endless.

But the cub did not think in man-fashion.  He did not look at things with wide vision.  He was single-purposed, and entertained but one thought or desire at a time.  Besides the law of meat, there were a myriad other and lesser laws for him to learn and obey.  The world was filled with surprise.  The stir of the life that was in him, the play of his muscles, was an unending happiness.  To run down meat was to experience thrills and elations.  His rages and battles were pleasures.  Terror itself, and the mystery of the unknown, led to his living.

And there were easements and satisfactions.  To have a full stomach, to doze lazily in the sunshine—such things were remuneration in full for his ardours and toils, while his ardours and tolls were in themselves self-remunerative.  They were expressions of life, and life is always happy when it is expressing itself.  So the cub had no quarrel with his hostile environment.  He was very much alive, very happy, and very proud of himself.
PART III
CHAPTER I—THE MAKERS OF FIRE

The cub came upon it suddenly.  It was his own fault.  He had been careless.  He had left the cave and run down to the stream to drink.  It might have been that he took no notice because he was heavy with sleep.  (He had been out all night on the meat-trail, and had but just then awakened.)  And his carelessness might have been due to the familiarity of the trail to the pool.  He had travelled it often, and nothing had ever happened on it.

He went down past the blasted pine, crossed the open space, and trotted in amongst the trees.  Then, at the same instant, he saw and smelt.  Before him, sitting silently on their haunches, were five live things, the like of which he had never seen before.  It was his first glimpse of mankind.  But at the sight of him the five men did not spring to their feet, nor show their teeth, nor snarl.  They did not move, but sat there, silent and ominous.

Nor did the cub move.  Every instinct of his nature would have impelled him to dash wildly away, had there not suddenly and for the first time arisen in him another and counter instinct.  A great awe descended upon him.  He was beaten down to movelessness by an overwhelming sense of his own weakness and littleness.  Here was mastery and power, something far and away beyond him.

The cub had never seen man, yet the instinct concerning man was his.  In dim ways he recognised in man the animal that had fought itself to primacy over the other animals of the Wild.  Not alone out of his own eyes, but out of the eyes of all his ancestors was the cub now looking upon man—out of eyes that had circled in the darkness around countless winter camp-fires, that had peered from safe distances and from the hearts of thickets at the strange, two-legged animal that was lord over living things.  The spell of the cub’s heritage was upon him, the fear and the respect born of the centuries of struggle and the accumulated experience of the generations.  The heritage was too compelling for a wolf that was only a cub.  Had he been full-grown, he would have run away.  As it was, he cowered down in a paralysis of fear, already half proffering the submission that his kind had proffered from the first time a wolf came in to sit by man’s fire and be made warm.

One of the Indians arose and walked over to him and stooped above him.  The cub cowered closer to the ground.  It was the unknown, objectified at last, in concrete flesh and blood, bending over him and reaching down to seize hold of him.  His hair bristled involuntarily; his lips writhed back and his little fangs were bared.  The hand, poised like doom above him, hesitated, and the man spoke laughing, “Wabam wabisca ip pit tah.”  (“Look!  The white fangs!”)

The other Indians laughed loudly, and urged the man on to pick up the cub.  As the hand descended closer and closer, there raged within the cub a battle of the instincts.  He experienced two great impulsions—to yield and to fight.  The resulting action was a compromise.  He did both.  He yielded till the hand almost touched him.  Then he fought, his teeth flashing in a snap that sank them into the hand.  The next moment he received a clout alongside the head that knocked him over on his side.  Then all fight fled out of him.  His puppyhood and the instinct of submission took charge of him.  He sat up on his haunches and ki-yi’d.  But the man whose hand he had bitten was angry.  The cub received a clout on the other side of his head.  Whereupon he sat up and ki-yi’d louder than ever.

The four Indians laughed more loudly, while even the man who had been bitten began to laugh.  They surrounded the cub and laughed at him, while he wailed out his terror and his hurt.  In the midst of it, he heard something.  The Indians heard it too.  But the cub knew what it was, and with a last, long wail that had in it more of triumph than grief, he ceased his noise and waited for the coming of his mother, of his ferocious and indomitable mother who fought and killed all things and was never afraid.  She was snarling as she ran.  She had heard the cry of her cub and was dashing to save him.

She bounded in amongst them, her anxious and militant motherhood making her anything but a pretty sight.  But to the cub the spectacle of her protective rage was pleasing.  He uttered a glad little cry and bounded to meet her, while the man-animals went back hastily several steps.  The she-wolf stood over against her cub, facing the men, with bristling hair, a snarl rumbling deep in her throat.  Her face was distorted and malignant with menace, even the bridge of the nose wrinkling from tip to eyes so prodigious was her snarl.

Then it was that a cry went up from one of the men.  “Kiche!” was what he uttered.  It was an exclamation of surprise.  The cub felt his mother wilting at the sound.

“Kiche!” the man cried again, this time with sharpness and authority.

And then the cub saw his mother, the she-wolf, the fearless one, crouching down till her belly touched the ground, whimpering, wagging her tail, making peace signs.  The cub could not understand.  He was appalled.  The awe of man rushed over him again.  His instinct had been true.  His mother verified it.  She, too, rendered submission to the man-animals.

The man who had spoken came over to her.  He put his hand upon her head, and she only crouched closer.  She did not snap, nor threaten to snap.  The other men came up, and surrounded her, and felt her, and pawed her, which actions she made no attempt to resent.  They were greatly excited, and made many noises with their mouths.  These noises were not indication of danger, the cub decided, as he crouched near his mother still bristling from time to time but doing his best to submit.

“It is not strange,” an Indian was saying.  “Her father was a wolf.  It is true, her mother was a dog; but did not my brother tie her out in the woods all of three nights in the mating season?  Therefore was the father of Kiche a wolf.”

“It is a year, Grey Beaver, since she ran away,” spoke a second Indian.

“It is not strange, Salmon Tongue,” Grey Beaver answered.  “It was the time of the famine, and there was no meat for the dogs.”

“She has lived with the wolves,” said a third Indian.

“So it would seem, Three Eagles,” Grey Beaver answered, laying his hand on the cub; “and this be the sign of it.”

The cub snarled a little at the touch of the hand, and the hand flew back to administer a clout.  Whereupon the cub covered its fangs, and sank down submissively, while the hand, returning, rubbed behind his ears, and up and down his back.

“This be the sign of it,” Grey Beaver went on.  “It is plain that his mother is Kiche.  But his father was a wolf.  Wherefore is there in him little dog and much wolf.  His fangs be white, and White Fang shall be his name.  I have spoken.  He is my dog.  For was not Kiche my brother’s dog?  And is not my brother dead?”

The cub, who had thus received a name in the world, lay and watched.  For a time the man-animals continued to make their mouth-noises.  Then Grey Beaver took a knife from a sheath that hung around his neck, and went into the thicket and cut a stick.  White Fang watched him.  He notched the stick at each end and in the notches fastened strings of raw-hide.  One string he tied around the throat of Kiche.  Then he led her to a small pine, around which he tied the other string.

White Fang followed and lay down beside her.  Salmon Tongue’s hand reached out to him and rolled him over on his back.  Kiche looked on anxiously.  White Fang felt fear mounting in him again.  He could not quite suppress a snarl, but he made no offer to snap.  The hand, with fingers crooked and spread apart, rubbed his stomach in a playful way and rolled him from side to side.  It was ridiculous and ungainly, lying there on his back with legs sprawling in the air.  Besides, it was a position of such utter helplessness that White Fang’s whole nature revolted against it.  He could do nothing to defend himself.  If this man-animal intended harm, White Fang knew that he could not escape it.  How could he spring away with his four legs in the air above him?  Yet submission made him master his fear, and he only growled softly.  This growl he could not suppress; nor did the man-animal resent it by giving him a blow on the head.  And furthermore, such was the strangeness of it, White Fang experienced an unaccountable sensation of pleasure as the hand rubbed back and forth.  When he was rolled on his side he ceased to growl, when the fingers pressed and prodded at the base of his ears the pleasurable sensation increased; and when, with a final rub and scratch, the man left him alone and went away, all fear had died out of White Fang.  He was to know fear many times in his dealing with man; yet it was a token of the fearless companionship with man that was ultimately to be his.

After a time, White Fang heard strange noises approaching.  He was quick in his classification, for he knew them at once for man-animal noises.  A few minutes later the remainder of the tribe, strung out as it was on the march, trailed in.  There were more men and many women and children, forty souls of them, and all heavily burdened with camp equipage and outfit.  Also there were many dogs; and these, with the exception of the part-grown puppies, were likewise burdened with camp outfit.  On their backs, in bags that fastened tightly around underneath, the dogs carried from twenty to thirty pounds of weight.

White Fang had never seen dogs before, but at sight of them he felt that they were his own kind, only somehow different.  But they displayed little difference from the wolf when they discovered the cub and his mother.  There was a rush.  White Fang bristled and snarled and snapped in the face of the open-mouthed oncoming wave of dogs, and went down and under them, feeling the sharp slash of teeth in his body, himself biting and tearing at the legs and bellies above him.  There was a great uproar.  He could hear the snarl of Kiche as she fought for him; and he could hear the cries of the man-animals, the sound of clubs striking upon bodies, and the yelps of pain from the dogs so struck.

Only a few seconds elapsed before he was on his feet again.  He could now see the man-animals driving back the dogs with clubs and stones, defending him, saving him from the savage teeth of his kind that somehow was not his kind.  And though there was no reason in his brain for a clear conception of so abstract a thing as justice, nevertheless, in his own way, he felt the justice of the man-animals, and he knew them for what they were—makers of law and executors of law.  Also, he appreciated the power with which they administered the law.  Unlike any animals he had ever encountered, they did not bite nor claw.  They enforced their live strength with the power of dead things.  Dead things did their bidding.  Thus, sticks and stones, directed by these strange creatures, leaped through the air like living things, inflicting grievous hurts upon the dogs.

To his mind this was power unusual, power inconceivable and beyond the natural, power that was godlike.  White Fang, in the very nature of him, could never know anything about gods; at the best he could know only things that were beyond knowing—but the wonder and awe that he had of these man-animals in ways resembled what would be the wonder and awe of man at sight of some celestial creature, on a mountain top, hurling thunderbolts from either hand at an astonished world.

The last dog had been driven back.  The hubbub died down.  And White Fang licked his hurts and meditated upon this, his first taste of pack-cruelty and his introduction to the pack.  He had never dreamed that his own kind consisted of more than One Eye, his mother, and himself.  They had constituted a kind apart, and here, abruptly, he had discovered many more creatures apparently of his own kind.  And there was a subconscious resentment that these, his kind, at first sight had pitched upon him and tried to destroy him.  In the same way he resented his mother being tied with a stick, even though it was done by the superior man-animals.  It savoured of the trap, of bondage.  Yet of the trap and of bondage he knew nothing.  Freedom to roam and run and lie down at will, had been his heritage; and here it was being infringed upon.  His mother’s movements were restricted to the length of a stick, and by the length of that same stick was he restricted, for he had not yet got beyond the need of his mother’s side.

He did not like it.  Nor did he like it when the man-animals arose and went on with their march; for a tiny man-animal took the other end of the stick and led Kiche captive behind him, and behind Kiche followed White Fang, greatly perturbed and worried by this new adventure he had entered upon.

They went down the valley of the stream, far beyond White Fang’s widest ranging, until they came to the end of the valley, where the stream ran into the Mackenzie River.  Here, where canoes were cached on poles high in the air and where stood fish-racks for the drying of fish, camp was made; and White Fang looked on with wondering eyes.  The superiority of these man-animals increased with every moment.  There was their mastery over all these sharp-fanged dogs.  It breathed of power.  But greater than that, to the wolf-cub, was their mastery over things not alive; their capacity to communicate motion to unmoving things; their capacity to change the very face of the world.

It was this last that especially affected him.  The elevation of frames of poles caught his eye; yet this in itself was not so remarkable, being done by the same creatures that flung sticks and stones to great distances.  But when the frames of poles were made into tepees by being covered with cloth and skins, White Fang was astounded.  It was the colossal bulk of them that impressed him.  They arose around him, on every side, like some monstrous quick-growing form of life.  They occupied nearly the whole circumference of his field of vision.  He was afraid of them.  They loomed ominously above him; and when the breeze stirred them into huge movements, he cowered down in fear, keeping his eyes warily upon them, and prepared to spring away if they attempted to precipitate themselves upon him.

But in a short while his fear of the tepees passed away.  He saw the women and children passing in and out of them without harm, and he saw the dogs trying often to get into them, and being driven away with sharp words and flying stones.  After a time, he left Kiche’s side and crawled cautiously toward the wall of the nearest tepee.  It was the curiosity of growth that urged him on—the necessity of learning and living and doing that brings experience.  The last few inches to the wall of the tepee were crawled with painful slowness and precaution.  The day’s events had prepared him for the unknown to manifest itself in most stupendous and unthinkable ways.  At last his nose touched the canvas.  He waited.  Nothing happened.  Then he smelled the strange fabric, saturated with the man-smell.  He closed on the canvas with his teeth and gave a gentle tug.  Nothing happened, though the adjacent portions of the tepee moved.  He tugged harder.  There was a greater movement.  It was delightful.  He tugged still harder, and repeatedly, until the whole tepee was in motion.  Then the sharp cry of a squaw inside sent him scampering back to Kiche.  But after that he was afraid no more of the looming bulks of the tepees.

A moment later he was straying away again from his mother.  Her stick was tied to a peg in the ground and she could not follow him.  A part-grown puppy, somewhat larger and older than he, came toward him slowly, with ostentatious and belligerent importance.  The puppy’s name, as White Fang was afterward to hear him called, was Lip-lip.  He had had experience in puppy fights and was already something of a bully.

Lip-lip was White Fang’s own kind, and, being only a puppy, did not seem dangerous; so White Fang prepared to meet him in a friendly spirit.  But when the strangers walk became stiff-legged and his lips lifted clear of his teeth, White Fang stiffened too, and answered with lifted lips.  They half circled about each other, tentatively, snarling and bristling.  This lasted several minutes, and White Fang was beginning to enjoy it, as a sort of game.  But suddenly, with remarkable swiftness, Lip-lip leaped in, delivering a slashing snap, and leaped away again.  The snap had taken effect on the shoulder that had been hurt by the lynx and that was still sore deep down near the bone.  The surprise and hurt of it brought a yelp out of White Fang; but the next moment, in a rush of anger, he was upon Lip-lip and snapping viciously.

But Lip-lip had lived his life in camp and had fought many puppy fights.  Three times, four times, and half a dozen times, his sharp little teeth scored on the newcomer, until White Fang, yelping shamelessly, fled to the protection of his mother.  It was the first of the many fights he was to have with Lip-lip, for they were enemies from the start, born so, with natures destined perpetually to clash.

Kiche licked White Fang soothingly with her tongue, and tried to prevail upon him to remain with her.  But his curiosity was rampant, and several minutes later he was venturing forth on a new quest.  He came upon one of the man-animals, Grey Beaver, who was squatting on his hams and doing something with sticks and dry moss spread before him on the ground.  White Fang came near to him and watched.  Grey Beaver made mouth-noises which White Fang interpreted as not hostile, so he came still nearer.

Women and children were carrying more sticks and branches to Grey Beaver.  It was evidently an affair of moment.  White Fang came in until he touched Grey Beaver’s knee, so curious was he, and already forgetful that this was a terrible man-animal.  Suddenly he saw a strange thing like mist beginning to arise from the sticks and moss beneath Grey Beaver’s hands.  Then, amongst the sticks themselves, appeared a live thing, twisting and turning, of a colour like the colour of the sun in the sky.  White Fang knew nothing about fire.  It drew him as the light, in the mouth of the cave had drawn him in his early puppyhood.  He crawled the several steps toward the flame.  He heard Grey Beaver chuckle above him, and he knew the sound was not hostile.  Then his nose touched the flame, and at the same instant his little tongue went out to it.

For a moment he was paralysed.  The unknown, lurking in the midst of the sticks and moss, was savagely clutching him by the nose.  He scrambled backward, bursting out in an astonished explosion of ki-yi’s.  At the sound, Kiche leaped snarling to the end of her stick, and there raged terribly because she could not come to his aid.  But Grey Beaver laughed loudly, and slapped his thighs, and told the happening to all the rest of the camp, till everybody was laughing uproariously.  But White Fang sat on his haunches and ki-yi’d and ki-yi’d, a forlorn and pitiable little figure in the midst of the man-animals.

It was the worst hurt he had ever known.  Both nose and tongue had been scorched by the live thing, sun-coloured, that had grown up under Grey Beaver’s hands.  He cried and cried interminably, and every fresh wail was greeted by bursts of laughter on the part of the man-animals.  He tried to soothe his nose with his tongue, but the tongue was burnt too, and the two hurts coming together produced greater hurt; whereupon he cried more hopelessly and helplessly than ever.

And then shame came to him.  He knew laughter and the meaning of it.  It is not given us to know how some animals know laughter, and know when they are being laughed at; but it was this same way that White Fang knew it.  And he felt shame that the man-animals should be laughing at him.  He turned and fled away, not from the hurt of the fire, but from the laughter that sank even deeper, and hurt in the spirit of him.  And he fled to Kiche, raging at the end of her stick like an animal gone mad—to Kiche, the one creature in the world who was not laughing at him.

Twilight drew down and night came on, and White Fang lay by his mother’s side.  His nose and tongue still hurt, but he was perplexed by a greater trouble.  He was homesick.  He felt a vacancy in him, a need for the hush and quietude of the stream and the cave in the cliff.  Life had become too populous.  There were so many of the man-animals, men, women, and children, all making noises and irritations.  And there were the dogs, ever squabbling and bickering, bursting into uproars and creating confusions.  The restful loneliness of the only life he had known was gone.  Here the very air was palpitant with life.  It hummed and buzzed unceasingly.  Continually changing its intensity and abruptly variant in pitch, it impinged on his nerves and senses, made him nervous and restless and worried him with a perpetual imminence of happening.

He watched the man-animals coming and going and moving about the camp.  In fashion distantly resembling the way men look upon the gods they create, so looked White Fang upon the man-animals before him.  They were superior creatures, of a verity, gods.  To his dim comprehension they were as much wonder-workers as gods are to men.  They were creatures of mastery, possessing all manner of unknown and impossible potencies, overlords of the alive and the not alive—making obey that which moved, imparting movement to that which did not move, and making life, sun-coloured and biting life, to grow out of dead moss and wood.  They were fire-makers!  They were gods.
CHAPTER II—THE BONDAGE

The days were thronged with experience for White Fang.  During the time that Kiche was tied by the stick, he ran about over all the camp, inquiring, investigating, learning.  He quickly came to know much of the ways of the man-animals, but familiarity did not breed contempt.  The more he came to know them, the more they vindicated their superiority, the more they displayed their mysterious powers, the greater loomed their god-likeness.

To man has been given the grief, often, of seeing his gods overthrown and his altars crumbling; but to the wolf and the wild dog that have come in to crouch at man’s feet, this grief has never come.  Unlike man, whose gods are of the unseen and the overguessed, vapours and mists of fancy eluding the garmenture of reality, wandering wraiths of desired goodness and power, intangible out-croppings of self into the realm of spirit—unlike man, the wolf and the wild dog that have come in to the fire find their gods in the living flesh, solid to the touch, occupying earth-space and requiring time for the accomplishment of their ends and their existence.  No effort of faith is necessary to believe in such a god; no effort of will can possibly induce disbelief in such a god.  There is no getting away from it.  There it stands, on its two hind-legs, club in hand, immensely potential, passionate and wrathful and loving, god and mystery and power all wrapped up and around by flesh that bleeds when it is torn and that is good to eat like any flesh.

And so it was with White Fang.  The man-animals were gods unmistakable and unescapable.  As his mother, Kiche, had rendered her allegiance to them at the first cry of her name, so he was beginning to render his allegiance.  He gave them the trail as a privilege indubitably theirs.  When they walked, he got out of their way.  When they called, he came.  When they threatened, he cowered down.  When they commanded him to go, he went away hurriedly.  For behind any wish of theirs was power to enforce that wish, power that hurt, power that expressed itself in clouts and clubs, in flying stones and stinging lashes of whips.

He belonged to them as all dogs belonged to them.  His actions were theirs to command.  His body was theirs to maul, to stamp upon, to tolerate.  Such was the lesson that was quickly borne in upon him.  It came hard, going as it did, counter to much that was strong and dominant in his own nature; and, while he disliked it in the learning of it, unknown to himself he was learning to like it.  It was a placing of his destiny in another’s hands, a shifting of the responsibilities of existence.  This in itself was compensation, for it is always easier to lean upon another than to stand alone.

But it did not all happen in a day, this giving over of himself, body and soul, to the man-animals.  He could not immediately forego his wild heritage and his memories of the Wild.  There were days when he crept to the edge of the forest and stood and listened to something calling him far and away.  And always he returned, restless and uncomfortable, to whimper softly and wistfully at Kiche’s side and to lick her face with eager, questioning tongue.

White Fang learned rapidly the ways of the camp.  He knew the injustice and greediness of the older dogs when meat or fish was thrown out to be eaten.  He came to know that men were more just, children more cruel, and women more kindly and more likely to toss him a bit of meat or bone.  And after two or three painful adventures with the mothers of part-grown puppies, he came into the knowledge that it was always good policy to let such mothers alone, to keep away from them as far as possible, and to avoid them when he saw them coming.

But the bane of his life was Lip-lip.  Larger, older, and stronger, Lip-lip had selected White Fang for his special object of persecution.  White Fang fought willingly enough, but he was outclassed.  His enemy was too big.  Lip-lip became a nightmare to him.  Whenever he ventured away from his mother, the bully was sure to appear, trailing at his heels, snarling at him, picking upon him, and watchful of an opportunity, when no man-animal was near, to spring upon him and force a fight.  As Lip-lip invariably won, he enjoyed it hugely.  It became his chief delight in life, as it became White Fang’s chief torment.

But the effect upon White Fang was not to cow him.  Though he suffered most of the damage and was always defeated, his spirit remained unsubdued.  Yet a bad effect was produced.  He became malignant and morose.  His temper had been savage by birth, but it became more savage under this unending persecution.  The genial, playful, puppyish side of him found little expression.  He never played and gambolled about with the other puppies of the camp.  Lip-lip would not permit it.  The moment White Fang appeared near them, Lip-lip was upon him, bullying and hectoring him, or fighting with him until he had driven him away.

The effect of all this was to rob White Fang of much of his puppyhood and to make him in his comportment older than his age.  Denied the outlet, through play, of his energies, he recoiled upon himself and developed his mental processes.  He became cunning; he had idle time in which to devote himself to thoughts of trickery.  Prevented from obtaining his share of meat and fish when a general feed was given to the camp-dogs, he became a clever thief.  He had to forage for himself, and he foraged well, though he was oft-times a plague to the squaws in consequence.  He learned to sneak about camp, to be crafty, to know what was going on everywhere, to see and to hear everything and to reason accordingly, and successfully to devise ways and means of avoiding his implacable persecutor.

It was early in the days of his persecution that he played his first really big crafty game and got there from his first taste of revenge.  As Kiche, when with the wolves, had lured out to destruction dogs from the camps of men, so White Fang, in manner somewhat similar, lured Lip-lip into Kiche’s avenging jaws.  Retreating before Lip-lip, White Fang made an indirect flight that led in and out and around the various tepees of the camp.  He was a good runner, swifter than any puppy of his size, and swifter than Lip-lip.  But he did not run his best in this chase.  He barely held his own, one leap ahead of his pursuer.

Lip-lip, excited by the chase and by the persistent nearness of his victim, forgot caution and locality.  When he remembered locality, it was too late.  Dashing at top speed around a tepee, he ran full tilt into Kiche lying at the end of her stick.  He gave one yelp of consternation, and then her punishing jaws closed upon him.  She was tied, but he could not get away from her easily.  She rolled him off his legs so that he could not run, while she repeatedly ripped and slashed him with her fangs.

When at last he succeeded in rolling clear of her, he crawled to his feet, badly dishevelled, hurt both in body and in spirit.  His hair was standing out all over him in tufts where her teeth had mauled.  He stood where he had arisen, opened his mouth, and broke out the long, heart-broken puppy wail.  But even this he was not allowed to complete.  In the middle of it, White Fang, rushing in, sank his teeth into Lip-lip’s hind leg.  There was no fight left in Lip-lip, and he ran away shamelessly, his victim hot on his heels and worrying him all the way back to his own tepee.  Here the squaws came to his aid, and White Fang, transformed into a raging demon, was finally driven off only by a fusillade of stones.

Came the day when Grey Beaver, deciding that the liability of her running away was past, released Kiche.  White Fang was delighted with his mother’s freedom.  He accompanied her joyfully about the camp; and, so long as he remained close by her side, Lip-lip kept a respectful distance.  White-Fang even bristled up to him and walked stiff-legged, but Lip-lip ignored the challenge.  He was no fool himself, and whatever vengeance he desired to wreak, he could wait until he caught White Fang alone.

Later on that day, Kiche and White Fang strayed into the edge of the woods next to the camp.  He had led his mother there, step by step, and now when she stopped, he tried to inveigle her farther.  The stream, the lair, and the quiet woods were calling to him, and he wanted her to come.  He ran on a few steps, stopped, and looked back.  She had not moved.  He whined pleadingly, and scurried playfully in and out of the underbrush.  He ran back to her, licked her face, and ran on again.  And still she did not move.  He stopped and regarded her, all of an intentness and eagerness, physically expressed, that slowly faded out of him as she turned her head and gazed back at the camp.

There was something calling to him out there in the open.  His mother heard it too.  But she heard also that other and louder call, the call of the fire and of man—the call which has been given alone of all animals to the wolf to answer, to the wolf and the wild-dog, who are brothers.

Kiche turned and slowly trotted back toward camp.  Stronger than the physical restraint of the stick was the clutch of the camp upon her.  Unseen and occultly, the gods still gripped with their power and would not let her go.  White Fang sat down in the shadow of a birch and whimpered softly.  There was a strong smell of pine, and subtle wood fragrances filled the air, reminding him of his old life of freedom before the days of his bondage.  But he was still only a part-grown puppy, and stronger than the call either of man or of the Wild was the call of his mother.  All the hours of his short life he had depended upon her.  The time was yet to come for independence.  So he arose and trotted forlornly back to camp, pausing once, and twice, to sit down and whimper and to listen to the call that still sounded in the depths of the forest.

In the Wild the time of a mother with her young is short; but under the dominion of man it is sometimes even shorter.  Thus it was with White Fang.  Grey Beaver was in the debt of Three Eagles.  Three Eagles was going away on a trip up the Mackenzie to the Great Slave Lake.  A strip of scarlet cloth, a bearskin, twenty cartridges, and Kiche, went to pay the debt.  White Fang saw his mother taken aboard Three Eagles’ canoe, and tried to follow her.  A blow from Three Eagles knocked him backward to the land.  The canoe shoved off.  He sprang into the water and swam after it, deaf to the sharp cries of Grey Beaver to return.  Even a man-animal, a god, White Fang ignored, such was the terror he was in of losing his mother.

But gods are accustomed to being obeyed, and Grey Beaver wrathfully launched a canoe in pursuit.  When he overtook White Fang, he reached down and by the nape of the neck lifted him clear of the water.  He did not deposit him at once in the bottom of the canoe.  Holding him suspended with one hand, with the other hand he proceeded to give him a beating.  And it was a beating.  His hand was heavy.  Every blow was shrewd to hurt; and he delivered a multitude of blows.

Impelled by the blows that rained upon him, now from this side, now from that, White Fang swung back and forth like an erratic and jerky pendulum.  Varying were the emotions that surged through him.  At first, he had known surprise.  Then came a momentary fear, when he yelped several times to the impact of the hand.  But this was quickly followed by anger.  His free nature asserted itself, and he showed his teeth and snarled fearlessly in the face of the wrathful god.  This but served to make the god more wrathful.  The blows came faster, heavier, more shrewd to hurt.

Grey Beaver continued to beat, White Fang continued to snarl.  But this could not last for ever.  One or the other must give over, and that one was White Fang.  Fear surged through him again.  For the first time he was being really man-handled.  The occasional blows of sticks and stones he had previously experienced were as caresses compared with this.  He broke down and began to cry and yelp.  For a time each blow brought a yelp from him; but fear passed into terror, until finally his yelps were voiced in unbroken succession, unconnected with the rhythm of the punishment.

At last Grey Beaver withheld his hand.  White Fang, hanging limply, continued to cry.  This seemed to satisfy his master, who flung him down roughly in the bottom of the canoe.  In the meantime the canoe had drifted down the stream.  Grey Beaver picked up the paddle.  White Fang was in his way.  He spurned him savagely with his foot.  In that moment White Fang’s free nature flashed forth again, and he sank his teeth into the moccasined foot.

The beating that had gone before was as nothing compared with the beating he now received.  Grey Beaver’s wrath was terrible; likewise was White Fang’s fright.  Not only the hand, but the hard wooden paddle was used upon him; and he was bruised and sore in all his small body when he was again flung down in the canoe.  Again, and this time with purpose, did Grey Beaver kick him.  White Fang did not repeat his attack on the foot.  He had learned another lesson of his bondage.  Never, no matter what the circumstance, must he dare to bite the god who was lord and master over him; the body of the lord and master was sacred, not to be defiled by the teeth of such as he.  That was evidently the crime of crimes, the one offence there was no condoning nor overlooking.

When the canoe touched the shore, White Fang lay whimpering and motionless, waiting the will of Grey Beaver.  It was Grey Beaver’s will that he should go ashore, for ashore he was flung, striking heavily on his side and hurting his bruises afresh.  He crawled tremblingly to his feet and stood whimpering.  Lip-lip, who had watched the whole proceeding from the bank, now rushed upon him, knocking him over and sinking his teeth into him.  White Fang was too helpless to defend himself, and it would have gone hard with him had not Grey Beaver’s foot shot out, lifting Lip-lip into the air with its violence so that he smashed down to earth a dozen feet away.  This was the man-animal’s justice; and even then, in his own pitiable plight, White Fang experienced a little grateful thrill.  At Grey Beaver’s heels he limped obediently through the village to the tepee.  And so it came that White Fang learned that the right to punish was something the gods reserved for themselves and denied to the lesser creatures under them.

That night, when all was still, White Fang remembered his mother and sorrowed for her.  He sorrowed too loudly and woke up Grey Beaver, who beat him.  After that he mourned gently when the gods were around.  But sometimes, straying off to the edge of the woods by himself, he gave vent to his grief, and cried it out with loud whimperings and wailings.

It was during this period that he might have harkened to the memories of the lair and the stream and run back to the Wild.  But the memory of his mother held him.  As the hunting man-animals went out and came back, so she would come back to the village some time.  So he remained in his bondage waiting for her.

But it was not altogether an unhappy bondage.  There was much to interest him.  Something was always happening.  There was no end to the strange things these gods did, and he was always curious to see.  Besides, he was learning how to get along with Grey Beaver.  Obedience, rigid, undeviating obedience, was what was exacted of him; and in return he escaped beatings and his existence was tolerated.

Nay, Grey Beaver himself sometimes tossed him a piece of meat, and defended him against the other dogs in the eating of it.  And such a piece of meat was of value.  It was worth more, in some strange way, then a dozen pieces of meat from the hand of a squaw.  Grey Beaver never petted nor caressed.  Perhaps it was the weight of his hand, perhaps his justice, perhaps the sheer power of him, and perhaps it was all these things that influenced White Fang; for a certain tie of attachment was forming between him and his surly lord.

Insidiously, and by remote ways, as well as by the power of stick and stone and clout of hand, were the shackles of White Fang’s bondage being riveted upon him.  The qualities in his kind that in the beginning made it possible for them to come in to the fires of men, were qualities capable of development.  They were developing in him, and the camp-life, replete with misery as it was, was secretly endearing itself to him all the time.  But White Fang was unaware of it.  He knew only grief for the loss of Kiche, hope for her return, and a hungry yearning for the free life that had been his.
CHAPTER III—THE OUTCAST

Lip-lip continued so to darken his days that White Fang became wickeder and more ferocious than it was his natural right to be.  Savageness was a part of his make-up, but the savageness thus developed exceeded his make-up.  He acquired a reputation for wickedness amongst the man-animals themselves.  Wherever there was trouble and uproar in camp, fighting and squabbling or the outcry of a squaw over a bit of stolen meat, they were sure to find White Fang mixed up in it and usually at the bottom of it.  They did not bother to look after the causes of his conduct.  They saw only the effects, and the effects were bad.  He was a sneak and a thief, a mischief-maker, a fomenter of trouble; and irate squaws told him to his face, the while he eyed them alert and ready to dodge any quick-flung missile, that he was a wolf and worthless and bound to come to an evil end.

He found himself an outcast in the midst of the populous camp.  All the young dogs followed Lip-lip’s lead.  There was a difference between White Fang and them.  Perhaps they sensed his wild-wood breed, and instinctively felt for him the enmity that the domestic dog feels for the wolf.  But be that as it may, they joined with Lip-lip in the persecution.  And, once declared against him, they found good reason to continue declared against him.  One and all, from time to time, they felt his teeth; and to his credit, he gave more than he received.  Many of them he could whip in single fight; but single fight was denied him.  The beginning of such a fight was a signal for all the young dogs in camp to come running and pitch upon him.

Out of this pack-persecution he learned two important things: how to take care of himself in a mass-fight against him—and how, on a single dog, to inflict the greatest amount of damage in the briefest space of time.  To keep one’s feet in the midst of the hostile mass meant life, and this he learnt well.  He became cat-like in his ability to stay on his feet.  Even grown dogs might hurtle him backward or sideways with the impact of their heavy bodies; and backward or sideways he would go, in the air or sliding on the ground, but always with his legs under him and his feet downward to the mother earth.

When dogs fight, there are usually preliminaries to the actual combat—snarlings and bristlings and stiff-legged struttings.  But White Fang learned to omit these preliminaries.  Delay meant the coming against him of all the young dogs.  He must do his work quickly and get away.  So he learnt to give no warning of his intention.  He rushed in and snapped and slashed on the instant, without notice, before his foe could prepare to meet him.  Thus he learned how to inflict quick and severe damage.  Also he learned the value of surprise.  A dog, taken off its guard, its shoulder slashed open or its ear ripped in ribbons before it knew what was happening, was a dog half whipped.

Furthermore, it was remarkably easy to overthrow a dog taken by surprise; while a dog, thus overthrown, invariably exposed for a moment the soft underside of its neck—the vulnerable point at which to strike for its life.  White Fang knew this point.  It was a knowledge bequeathed to him directly from the hunting generation of wolves.  So it was that White Fang’s method when he took the offensive, was: first to find a young dog alone; second, to surprise it and knock it off its feet; and third, to drive in with his teeth at the soft throat.

Being but partly grown his jaws had not yet become large enough nor strong enough to make his throat-attack deadly; but many a young dog went around camp with a lacerated throat in token of White Fang’s intention.  And one day, catching one of his enemies alone on the edge of the woods, he managed, by repeatedly overthrowing him and attacking the throat, to cut the great vein and let out the life.  There was a great row that night.  He had been observed, the news had been carried to the dead dog’s master, the squaws remembered all the instances of stolen meat, and Grey Beaver was beset by many angry voices.  But he resolutely held the door of his tepee, inside which he had placed the culprit, and refused to permit the vengeance for which his tribespeople clamoured.

White Fang became hated by man and dog.  During this period of his development he never knew a moment’s security.  The tooth of every dog was against him, the hand of every man.  He was greeted with snarls by his kind, with curses and stones by his gods.  He lived tensely.  He was always keyed up, alert for attack, wary of being attacked, with an eye for sudden and unexpected missiles, prepared to act precipitately and coolly, to leap in with a flash of teeth, or to leap away with a menacing snarl.

As for snarling he could snarl more terribly than any dog, young or old, in camp.  The intent of the snarl is to warn or frighten, and judgment is required to know when it should be used.  White Fang knew how to make it and when to make it.  Into his snarl he incorporated all that was vicious, malignant, and horrible.  With nose serrulated by continuous spasms, hair bristling in recurrent waves, tongue whipping out like a red snake and whipping back again, ears flattened down, eyes gleaming hatred, lips wrinkled back, and fangs exposed and dripping, he could compel a pause on the part of almost any assailant.  A temporary pause, when taken off his guard, gave him the vital moment in which to think and determine his action.  But often a pause so gained lengthened out until it evolved into a complete cessation from the attack.  And before more than one of the grown dogs White Fang’s snarl enabled him to beat an honourable retreat.

An outcast himself from the pack of the part-grown dogs, his sanguinary methods and remarkable efficiency made the pack pay for its persecution of him.  Not permitted himself to run with the pack, the curious state of affairs obtained that no member of the pack could run outside the pack.  White Fang would not permit it.  What of his bushwhacking and waylaying tactics, the young dogs were afraid to run by themselves.  With the exception of Lip-lip, they were compelled to hunch together for mutual protection against the terrible enemy they had made.  A puppy alone by the river bank meant a puppy dead or a puppy that aroused the camp with its shrill pain and terror as it fled back from the wolf-cub that had waylaid it.

But White Fang’s reprisals did not cease, even when the young dogs had learned thoroughly that they must stay together.  He attacked them when he caught them alone, and they attacked him when they were bunched.  The sight of him was sufficient to start them rushing after him, at which times his swiftness usually carried him into safety.  But woe the dog that outran his fellows in such pursuit!  White Fang had learned to turn suddenly upon the pursuer that was ahead of the pack and thoroughly to rip him up before the pack could arrive.  This occurred with great frequency, for, once in full cry, the dogs were prone to forget themselves in the excitement of the chase, while White Fang never forgot himself.  Stealing backward glances as he ran, he was always ready to whirl around and down the overzealous pursuer that outran his fellows.

Young dogs are bound to play, and out of the exigencies of the situation they realised their play in this mimic warfare.  Thus it was that the hunt of White Fang became their chief game—a deadly game, withal, and at all times a serious game.  He, on the other hand, being the fastest-footed, was unafraid to venture anywhere.  During the period that he waited vainly for his mother to come back, he led the pack many a wild chase through the adjacent woods.  But the pack invariably lost him.  Its noise and outcry warned him of its presence, while he ran alone, velvet-footed, silently, a moving shadow among the trees after the manner of his father and mother before him.  Further he was more directly connected with the Wild than they; and he knew more of its secrets and stratagems.  A favourite trick of his was to lose his trail in running water and then lie quietly in a near-by thicket while their baffled cries arose around him.

Hated by his kind and by mankind, indomitable, perpetually warred upon and himself waging perpetual war, his development was rapid and one-sided.  This was no soil for kindliness and affection to blossom in.  Of such things he had not the faintest glimmering.  The code he learned was to obey the strong and to oppress the weak.  Grey Beaver was a god, and strong.  Therefore White Fang obeyed him.  But the dog younger or smaller than himself was weak, a thing to be destroyed.  His development was in the direction of power.  In order to face the constant danger of hurt and even of destruction, his predatory and protective faculties were unduly developed.  He became quicker of movement than the other dogs, swifter of foot, craftier, deadlier, more lithe, more lean with ironlike muscle and sinew, more enduring, more cruel, more ferocious, and more intelligent.  He had to become all these things, else he would not have held his own nor survive the hostile environment in which he found himself.
CHAPTER IV—THE TRAIL OF THE GODS

In the fall of the year, when the days were shortening and the bite of the frost was coming into the air, White Fang got his chance for liberty.  For several days there had been a great hubbub in the village.  The summer camp was being dismantled, and the tribe, bag and baggage, was preparing to go off to the fall hunting.  White Fang watched it all with eager eyes, and when the tepees began to come down and the canoes were loading at the bank, he understood.  Already the canoes were departing, and some had disappeared down the river.

Quite deliberately he determined to stay behind.  He waited his opportunity to slink out of camp to the woods.  Here, in the running stream where ice was beginning to form, he hid his trail.  Then he crawled into the heart of a dense thicket and waited.  The time passed by, and he slept intermittently for hours.  Then he was aroused by Grey Beaver’s voice calling him by name.  There were other voices.  White Fang could hear Grey Beaver’s squaw taking part in the search, and Mit-sah, who was Grey Beaver’s son.

White Fang trembled with fear, and though the impulse came to crawl out of his hiding-place, he resisted it.  After a time the voices died away, and some time after that he crept out to enjoy the success of his undertaking.  Darkness was coming on, and for a while he played about among the trees, pleasuring in his freedom.  Then, and quite suddenly, he became aware of loneliness.  He sat down to consider, listening to the silence of the forest and perturbed by it.  That nothing moved nor sounded, seemed ominous.  He felt the lurking of danger, unseen and unguessed.  He was suspicious of the looming bulks of the trees and of the dark shadows that might conceal all manner of perilous things.

Then it was cold.  Here was no warm side of a tepee against which to snuggle.  The frost was in his feet, and he kept lifting first one fore-foot and then the other.  He curved his bushy tail around to cover them, and at the same time he saw a vision.  There was nothing strange about it.  Upon his inward sight was impressed a succession of memory-pictures.  He saw the camp again, the tepees, and the blaze of the fires.  He heard the shrill voices of the women, the gruff basses of the men, and the snarling of the dogs.  He was hungry, and he remembered pieces of meat and fish that had been thrown him.  Here was no meat, nothing but a threatening and inedible silence.

His bondage had softened him.  Irresponsibility had weakened him.  He had forgotten how to shift for himself.  The night yawned about him.  His senses, accustomed to the hum and bustle of the camp, used to the continuous impact of sights and sounds, were now left idle.  There was nothing to do, nothing to see nor hear.  They strained to catch some interruption of the silence and immobility of nature.  They were appalled by inaction and by the feel of something terrible impending.

He gave a great start of fright.  A colossal and formless something was rushing across the field of his vision.  It was a tree-shadow flung by the moon, from whose face the clouds had been brushed away.  Reassured, he whimpered softly; then he suppressed the whimper for fear that it might attract the attention of the lurking dangers.

A tree, contracting in the cool of the night, made a loud noise.  It was directly above him.  He yelped in his fright.  A panic seized him, and he ran madly toward the village.  He knew an overpowering desire for the protection and companionship of man.  In his nostrils was the smell of the camp-smoke.  In his ears the camp-sounds and cries were ringing loud.  He passed out of the forest and into the moonlit open where were no shadows nor darknesses.  But no village greeted his eyes.  He had forgotten.  The village had gone away.

His wild flight ceased abruptly.  There was no place to which to flee.  He slunk forlornly through the deserted camp, smelling the rubbish-heaps and the discarded rags and tags of the gods.  He would have been glad for the rattle of stones about him, flung by an angry squaw, glad for the hand of Grey Beaver descending upon him in wrath; while he would have welcomed with delight Lip-lip and the whole snarling, cowardly pack.

He came to where Grey Beaver’s tepee had stood.  In the centre of the space it had occupied, he sat down.  He pointed his nose at the moon.  His throat was afflicted by rigid spasms, his mouth opened, and in a heart-broken cry bubbled up his loneliness and fear, his grief for Kiche, all his past sorrows and miseries as well as his apprehension of sufferings and dangers to come.  It was the long wolf-howl, full-throated and mournful, the first howl he had ever uttered.

The coming of daylight dispelled his fears but increased his loneliness.  The naked earth, which so shortly before had been so populous; thrust his loneliness more forcibly upon him.  It did not take him long to make up his mind.  He plunged into the forest and followed the river bank down the stream.  All day he ran.  He did not rest.  He seemed made to run on for ever.  His iron-like body ignored fatigue.  And even after fatigue came, his heritage of endurance braced him to endless endeavour and enabled him to drive his complaining body onward.

Where the river swung in against precipitous bluffs, he climbed the high mountains behind.  Rivers and streams that entered the main river he forded or swam.  Often he took to the rim-ice that was beginning to form, and more than once he crashed through and struggled for life in the icy current.  Always he was on the lookout for the trail of the gods where it might leave the river and proceed inland.

White Fang was intelligent beyond the average of his kind; yet his mental vision was not wide enough to embrace the other bank of the Mackenzie.  What if the trail of the gods led out on that side?  It never entered his head.  Later on, when he had travelled more and grown older and wiser and come to know more of trails and rivers, it might be that he could grasp and apprehend such a possibility.  But that mental power was yet in the future.  Just now he ran blindly, his own bank of the Mackenzie alone entering into his calculations.

All night he ran, blundering in the darkness into mishaps and obstacles that delayed but did not daunt.  By the middle of the second day he had been running continuously for thirty hours, and the iron of his flesh was giving out.  It was the endurance of his mind that kept him going.  He had not eaten in forty hours, and he was weak with hunger.  The repeated drenchings in the icy water had likewise had their effect on him.  His handsome coat was draggled.  The broad pads of his feet were bruised and bleeding.  He had begun to limp, and this limp increased with the hours.  To make it worse, the light of the sky was obscured and snow began to fall—a raw, moist, melting, clinging snow, slippery under foot, that hid from him the landscape he traversed, and that covered over the inequalities of the ground so that the way of his feet was more difficult and painful.

Grey Beaver had intended camping that night on the far bank of the Mackenzie, for it was in that direction that the hunting lay.  But on the near bank, shortly before dark, a moose coming down to drink, had been espied by Kloo-kooch, who was Grey Beaver’s squaw.  Now, had not the moose come down to drink, had not Mit-sah been steering out of the course because of the snow, had not Kloo-kooch sighted the moose, and had not Grey Beaver killed it with a lucky shot from his rifle, all subsequent things would have happened differently.  Grey Beaver would not have camped on the near side of the Mackenzie, and White Fang would have passed by and gone on, either to die or to find his way to his wild brothers and become one of them—a wolf to the end of his days.

Night had fallen.  The snow was flying more thickly, and White Fang, whimpering softly to himself as he stumbled and limped along, came upon a fresh trail in the snow.  So fresh was it that he knew it immediately for what it was.  Whining with eagerness, he followed back from the river bank and in among the trees.  The camp-sounds came to his ears.  He saw the blaze of the fire, Kloo-kooch cooking, and Grey Beaver squatting on his hams and mumbling a chunk of raw tallow.  There was fresh meat in camp!

White Fang expected a beating.  He crouched and bristled a little at the thought of it.  Then he went forward again.  He feared and disliked the beating he knew to be waiting for him.  But he knew, further, that the comfort of the fire would be his, the protection of the gods, the companionship of the dogs—the last, a companionship of enmity, but none the less a companionship and satisfying to his gregarious needs.

He came cringing and crawling into the firelight.  Grey Beaver saw him, and stopped munching the tallow.  White Fang crawled slowly, cringing and grovelling in the abjectness of his abasement and submission.  He crawled straight toward Grey Beaver, every inch of his progress becoming slower and more painful.  At last he lay at the master’s feet, into whose possession he now surrendered himself, voluntarily, body and soul.  Of his own choice, he came in to sit by man’s fire and to be ruled by him.  White Fang trembled, waiting for the punishment to fall upon him.  There was a movement of the hand above him.  He cringed involuntarily under the expected blow.  It did not fall.  He stole a glance upward.  Grey Beaver was breaking the lump of tallow in half!  Grey Beaver was offering him one piece of the tallow!  Very gently and somewhat suspiciously, he first smelled the tallow and then proceeded to eat it.  Grey Beaver ordered meat to be brought to him, and guarded him from the other dogs while he ate.  After that, grateful and content, White Fang lay at Grey Beaver’s feet, gazing at the fire that warmed him, blinking and dozing, secure in the knowledge that the morrow would find him, not wandering forlorn through bleak forest-stretches, but in the camp of the man-animals, with the gods to whom he had given himself and upon whom he was now dependent.
CHAPTER V—THE COVENANT

When December was well along, Grey Beaver went on a journey up the Mackenzie.  Mit-sah and Kloo-kooch went with him.  One sled he drove himself, drawn by dogs he had traded for or borrowed.  A second and smaller sled was driven by Mit-sah, and to this was harnessed a team of puppies.  It was more of a toy affair than anything else, yet it was the delight of Mit-sah, who felt that he was beginning to do a man’s work in the world.  Also, he was learning to drive dogs and to train dogs; while the puppies themselves were being broken in to the harness.  Furthermore, the sled was of some service, for it carried nearly two hundred pounds of outfit and food.

White Fang had seen the camp-dogs toiling in the harness, so that he did not resent overmuch the first placing of the harness upon himself.  About his neck was put a moss-stuffed collar, which was connected by two pulling-traces to a strap that passed around his chest and over his back.  It was to this that was fastened the long rope by which he pulled at the sled.

There were seven puppies in the team.  The others had been born earlier in the year and were nine and ten months old, while White Fang was only eight months old.  Each dog was fastened to the sled by a single rope.  No two ropes were of the same length, while the difference in length between any two ropes was at least that of a dog’s body.  Every rope was brought to a ring at the front end of the sled.  The sled itself was without runners, being a birch-bark toboggan, with upturned forward end to keep it from ploughing under the snow.  This construction enabled the weight of the sled and load to be distributed over the largest snow-surface; for the snow was crystal-powder and very soft.  Observing the same principle of widest distribution of weight, the dogs at the ends of their ropes radiated fan-fashion from the nose of the sled, so that no dog trod in another’s footsteps.

There was, furthermore, another virtue in the fan-formation.  The ropes of varying length prevented the dogs attacking from the rear those that ran in front of them.  For a dog to attack another, it would have to turn upon one at a shorter rope.  In which case it would find itself face to face with the dog attacked, and also it would find itself facing the whip of the driver.  But the most peculiar virtue of all lay in the fact that the dog that strove to attack one in front of him must pull the sled faster, and that the faster the sled travelled, the faster could the dog attacked run away.  Thus, the dog behind could never catch up with the one in front.  The faster he ran, the faster ran the one he was after, and the faster ran all the dogs.  Incidentally, the sled went faster, and thus, by cunning indirection, did man increase his mastery over the beasts.

Mit-sah resembled his father, much of whose grey wisdom he possessed.  In the past he had observed Lip-lip’s persecution of White Fang; but at that time Lip-lip was another man’s dog, and Mit-sah had never dared more than to shy an occasional stone at him.  But now Lip-lip was his dog, and he proceeded to wreak his vengeance on him by putting him at the end of the longest rope.  This made Lip-lip the leader, and was apparently an honour! but in reality it took away from him all honour, and instead of being bully and master of the pack, he now found himself hated and persecuted by the pack.

Because he ran at the end of the longest rope, the dogs had always the view of him running away before them.  All that they saw of him was his bushy tail and fleeing hind legs—a view far less ferocious and intimidating than his bristling mane and gleaming fangs.  Also, dogs being so constituted in their mental ways, the sight of him running away gave desire to run after him and a feeling that he ran away from them.

The moment the sled started, the team took after Lip-lip in a chase that extended throughout the day.  At first he had been prone to turn upon his pursuers, jealous of his dignity and wrathful; but at such times Mit-sah would throw the stinging lash of the thirty-foot cariboo-gut whip into his face and compel him to turn tail and run on.  Lip-lip might face the pack, but he could not face that whip, and all that was left him to do was to keep his long rope taut and his flanks ahead of the teeth of his mates.

But a still greater cunning lurked in the recesses of the Indian mind.  To give point to unending pursuit of the leader, Mit-sah favoured him over the other dogs.  These favours aroused in them jealousy and hatred.  In their presence Mit-sah would give him meat and would give it to him only.  This was maddening to them.  They would rage around just outside the throwing-distance of the whip, while Lip-lip devoured the meat and Mit-sah protected him.  And when there was no meat to give, Mit-sah would keep the team at a distance and make believe to give meat to Lip-lip.

White Fang took kindly to the work.  He had travelled a greater distance than the other dogs in the yielding of himself to the rule of the gods, and he had learned more thoroughly the futility of opposing their will.  In addition, the persecution he had suffered from the pack had made the pack less to him in the scheme of things, and man more.  He had not learned to be dependent on his kind for companionship.  Besides, Kiche was well-nigh forgotten; and the chief outlet of expression that remained to him was in the allegiance he tendered the gods he had accepted as masters.  So he worked hard, learned discipline, and was obedient.  Faithfulness and willingness characterised his toil.  These are essential traits of the wolf and the wild-dog when they have become domesticated, and these traits White Fang possessed in unusual measure.

A companionship did exist between White Fang and the other dogs, but it was one of warfare and enmity.  He had never learned to play with them.  He knew only how to fight, and fight with them he did, returning to them a hundred-fold the snaps and slashes they had given him in the days when Lip-lip was leader of the pack.  But Lip-lip was no longer leader—except when he fled away before his mates at the end of his rope, the sled bounding along behind.  In camp he kept close to Mit-sah or Grey Beaver or Kloo-kooch.  He did not dare venture away from the gods, for now the fangs of all dogs were against him, and he tasted to the dregs the persecution that had been White Fang’s.

With the overthrow of Lip-lip, White Fang could have become leader of the pack.  But he was too morose and solitary for that.  He merely thrashed his team-mates.  Otherwise he ignored them.  They got out of his way when he came along; nor did the boldest of them ever dare to rob him of his meat.  On the contrary, they devoured their own meat hurriedly, for fear that he would take it away from them.  White Fang knew the law well: to oppress the weak and obey the strong.  He ate his share of meat as rapidly as he could.  And then woe the dog that had not yet finished!  A snarl and a flash of fangs, and that dog would wail his indignation to the uncomforting stars while White Fang finished his portion for him.

Every little while, however, one dog or another would flame up in revolt and be promptly subdued.  Thus White Fang was kept in training.  He was jealous of the isolation in which he kept himself in the midst of the pack, and he fought often to maintain it.  But such fights were of brief duration.  He was too quick for the others.  They were slashed open and bleeding before they knew what had happened, were whipped almost before they had begun to fight.

As rigid as the sled-discipline of the gods, was the discipline maintained by White Fang amongst his fellows.  He never allowed them any latitude.  He compelled them to an unremitting respect for him.  They might do as they pleased amongst themselves.  That was no concern of his.  But it was his concern that they leave him alone in his isolation, get out of his way when he elected to walk among them, and at all times acknowledge his mastery over them.  A hint of stiff-leggedness on their part, a lifted lip or a bristle of hair, and he would be upon them, merciless and cruel, swiftly convincing them of the error of their way.

He was a monstrous tyrant.  His mastery was rigid as steel.  He oppressed the weak with a vengeance.  Not for nothing had he been exposed to the pitiless struggles for life in the day of his cubhood, when his mother and he, alone and unaided, held their own and survived in the ferocious environment of the Wild.  And not for nothing had he learned to walk softly when superior strength went by.  He oppressed the weak, but he respected the strong.  And in the course of the long journey with Grey Beaver he walked softly indeed amongst the full-grown dogs in the camps of the strange man-animals they encountered.

The months passed by.  Still continued the journey of Grey Beaver.  White Fang’s strength was developed by the long hours on trail and the steady toil at the sled; and it would have seemed that his mental development was well-nigh complete.  He had come to know quite thoroughly the world in which he lived.  His outlook was bleak and materialistic.  The world as he saw it was a fierce and brutal world, a world without warmth, a world in which caresses and affection and the bright sweetnesses of the spirit did not exist.

He had no affection for Grey Beaver.  True, he was a god, but a most savage god.  White Fang was glad to acknowledge his lordship, but it was a lordship based upon superior intelligence and brute strength.  There was something in the fibre of White Fang’s being that made his lordship a thing to be desired, else he would not have come back from the Wild when he did to tender his allegiance.  There were deeps in his nature which had never been sounded.  A kind word, a caressing touch of the hand, on the part of Grey Beaver, might have sounded these deeps; but Grey Beaver did not caress, nor speak kind words.  It was not his way.  His primacy was savage, and savagely he ruled, administering justice with a club, punishing transgression with the pain of a blow, and rewarding merit, not by kindness, but by withholding a blow.

So White Fang knew nothing of the heaven a man’s hand might contain for him.  Besides, he did not like the hands of the man-animals.  He was suspicious of them.  It was true that they sometimes gave meat, but more often they gave hurt.  Hands were things to keep away from.  They hurled stones, wielded sticks and clubs and whips, administered slaps and clouts, and, when they touched him, were cunning to hurt with pinch and twist and wrench.  In strange villages he had encountered the hands of the children and learned that they were cruel to hurt.  Also, he had once nearly had an eye poked out by a toddling papoose.  From these experiences he became suspicious of all children.  He could not tolerate them.  When they came near with their ominous hands, he got up.

It was in a village at the Great Slave Lake, that, in the course of resenting the evil of the hands of the man-animals, he came to modify the law that he had learned from Grey Beaver: namely, that the unpardonable crime was to bite one of the gods.  In this village, after the custom of all dogs in all villages, White Fang went foraging, for food.  A boy was chopping frozen moose-meat with an axe, and the chips were flying in the snow.  White Fang, sliding by in quest of meat, stopped and began to eat the chips.  He observed the boy lay down the axe and take up a stout club.  White Fang sprang clear, just in time to escape the descending blow.  The boy pursued him, and he, a stranger in the village, fled between two tepees to find himself cornered against a high earth bank.

There was no escape for White Fang.  The only way out was between the two tepees, and this the boy guarded.  Holding his club prepared to strike, he drew in on his cornered quarry.  White Fang was furious.  He faced the boy, bristling and snarling, his sense of justice outraged.  He knew the law of forage.  All the wastage of meat, such as the frozen chips, belonged to the dog that found it.  He had done no wrong, broken no law, yet here was this boy preparing to give him a beating.  White Fang scarcely knew what happened.  He did it in a surge of rage.  And he did it so quickly that the boy did not know either.  All the boy knew was that he had in some unaccountable way been overturned into the snow, and that his club-hand had been ripped wide open by White Fang’s teeth.

But White Fang knew that he had broken the law of the gods.  He had driven his teeth into the sacred flesh of one of them, and could expect nothing but a most terrible punishment.  He fled away to Grey Beaver, behind whose protecting legs he crouched when the bitten boy and the boy’s family came, demanding vengeance.  But they went away with vengeance unsatisfied.  Grey Beaver defended White Fang.  So did Mit-sah and Kloo-kooch.  White Fang, listening to the wordy war and watching the angry gestures, knew that his act was justified.  And so it came that he learned there were gods and gods.  There were his gods, and there were other gods, and between them there was a difference.  Justice or injustice, it was all the same, he must take all things from the hands of his own gods.  But he was not compelled to take injustice from the other gods.  It was his privilege to resent it with his teeth.  And this also was a law of the gods.

Before the day was out, White Fang was to learn more about this law.  Mit-sah, alone, gathering firewood in the forest, encountered the boy that had been bitten.  With him were other boys.  Hot words passed.  Then all the boys attacked Mit-sah.  It was going hard with him.  Blows were raining upon him from all sides.  White Fang looked on at first.  This was an affair of the gods, and no concern of his.  Then he realised that this was Mit-sah, one of his own particular gods, who was being maltreated.  It was no reasoned impulse that made White Fang do what he then did.  A mad rush of anger sent him leaping in amongst the combatants.  Five minutes later the landscape was covered with fleeing boys, many of whom dripped blood upon the snow in token that White Fang’s teeth had not been idle.  When Mit-sah told the story in camp, Grey Beaver ordered meat to be given to White Fang.  He ordered much meat to be given, and White Fang, gorged and sleepy by the fire, knew that the law had received its verification.

It was in line with these experiences that White Fang came to learn the law of property and the duty of the defence of property.  From the protection of his god’s body to the protection of his god’s possessions was a step, and this step he made.  What was his god’s was to be defended against all the world—even to the extent of biting other gods.  Not only was such an act sacrilegious in its nature, but it was fraught with peril.  The gods were all-powerful, and a dog was no match against them; yet White Fang learned to face them, fiercely belligerent and unafraid.  Duty rose above fear, and thieving gods learned to leave Grey Beaver’s property alone.

One thing, in this connection, White Fang quickly learnt, and that was that a thieving god was usually a cowardly god and prone to run away at the sounding of the alarm.  Also, he learned that but brief time elapsed between his sounding of the alarm and Grey Beaver coming to his aid.  He came to know that it was not fear of him that drove the thief away, but fear of Grey Beaver.  White Fang did not give the alarm by barking.  He never barked.  His method was to drive straight at the intruder, and to sink his teeth in if he could.  Because he was morose and solitary, having nothing to do with the other dogs, he was unusually fitted to guard his master’s property; and in this he was encouraged and trained by Grey Beaver.  One result of this was to make White Fang more ferocious and indomitable, and more solitary.

The months went by, binding stronger and stronger the covenant between dog and man.  This was the ancient covenant that the first wolf that came in from the Wild entered into with man.  And, like all succeeding wolves and wild dogs that had done likewise, White Fang worked the covenant out for himself.  The terms were simple.  For the possession of a flesh-and-blood god, he exchanged his own liberty.  Food and fire, protection and companionship, were some of the things he received from the god.  In return, he guarded the god’s property, defended his body, worked for him, and obeyed him.

The possession of a god implies service.  White Fang’s was a service of duty and awe, but not of love.  He did not know what love was.  He had no experience of love.  Kiche was a remote memory.  Besides, not only had he abandoned the Wild and his kind when he gave himself up to man, but the terms of the covenant were such that if ever he met Kiche again he would not desert his god to go with her.  His allegiance to man seemed somehow a law of his being greater than the love of liberty, of kind and kin.
CHAPTER VI—THE FAMINE

The spring of the year was at hand when Grey Beaver finished his long journey.  It was April, and White Fang was a year old when he pulled into the home villages and was loosed from the harness by Mit-sah.  Though a long way from his full growth, White Fang, next to Lip-lip, was the largest yearling in the village.  Both from his father, the wolf, and from Kiche, he had inherited stature and strength, and already he was measuring up alongside the full-grown dogs.  But he had not yet grown compact.  His body was slender and rangy, and his strength more stringy than massive, His coat was the true wolf-grey, and to all appearances he was true wolf himself.  The quarter-strain of dog he had inherited from Kiche had left no mark on him physically, though it had played its part in his mental make-up.

He wandered through the village, recognising with staid satisfaction the various gods he had known before the long journey.  Then there were the dogs, puppies growing up like himself, and grown dogs that did not look so large and formidable as the memory pictures he retained of them.  Also, he stood less in fear of them than formerly, stalking among them with a certain careless ease that was as new to him as it was enjoyable.

There was Baseek, a grizzled old fellow that in his younger days had but to uncover his fangs to send White Fang cringing and crouching to the right about.  From him White Fang had learned much of his own insignificance; and from him he was now to learn much of the change and development that had taken place in himself.  While Baseek had been growing weaker with age, White Fang had been growing stronger with youth.

It was at the cutting-up of a moose, fresh-killed, that White Fang learned of the changed relations in which he stood to the dog-world.  He had got for himself a hoof and part of the shin-bone, to which quite a bit of meat was attached.  Withdrawn from the immediate scramble of the other dogs—in fact out of sight behind a thicket—he was devouring his prize, when Baseek rushed in upon him.  Before he knew what he was doing, he had slashed the intruder twice and sprung clear.  Baseek was surprised by the other’s temerity and swiftness of attack.  He stood, gazing stupidly across at White Fang, the raw, red shin-bone between them.

Baseek was old, and already he had come to know the increasing valour of the dogs it had been his wont to bully.  Bitter experiences these, which, perforce, he swallowed, calling upon all his wisdom to cope with them.  In the old days he would have sprung upon White Fang in a fury of righteous wrath.  But now his waning powers would not permit such a course.  He bristled fiercely and looked ominously across the shin-bone at White Fang.  And White Fang, resurrecting quite a deal of the old awe, seemed to wilt and to shrink in upon himself and grow small, as he cast about in his mind for a way to beat a retreat not too inglorious.

And right here Baseek erred.  Had he contented himself with looking fierce and ominous, all would have been well.  White Fang, on the verge of retreat, would have retreated, leaving the meat to him.  But Baseek did not wait.  He considered the victory already his and stepped forward to the meat.  As he bent his head carelessly to smell it, White Fang bristled slightly.  Even then it was not too late for Baseek to retrieve the situation.  Had he merely stood over the meat, head up and glowering, White Fang would ultimately have slunk away.  But the fresh meat was strong in Baseek’s nostrils, and greed urged him to take a bite of it.

This was too much for White Fang.  Fresh upon his months of mastery over his own team-mates, it was beyond his self-control to stand idly by while another devoured the meat that belonged to him.  He struck, after his custom, without warning.  With the first slash, Baseek’s right ear was ripped into ribbons.  He was astounded at the suddenness of it.  But more things, and most grievous ones, were happening with equal suddenness.  He was knocked off his feet.  His throat was bitten.  While he was struggling to his feet the young dog sank teeth twice into his shoulder.  The swiftness of it was bewildering.  He made a futile rush at White Fang, clipping the empty air with an outraged snap.  The next moment his nose was laid open, and he was staggering backward away from the meat.

The situation was now reversed.  White Fang stood over the shin-bone, bristling and menacing, while Baseek stood a little way off, preparing to retreat.  He dared not risk a fight with this young lightning-flash, and again he knew, and more bitterly, the enfeeblement of oncoming age.  His attempt to maintain his dignity was heroic.  Calmly turning his back upon young dog and shin-bone, as though both were beneath his notice and unworthy of his consideration, he stalked grandly away.  Nor, until well out of sight, did he stop to lick his bleeding wounds.

The effect on White Fang was to give him a greater faith in himself, and a greater pride.  He walked less softly among the grown dogs; his attitude toward them was less compromising.  Not that he went out of his way looking for trouble.  Far from it.  But upon his way he demanded consideration.  He stood upon his right to go his way unmolested and to give trail to no dog.  He had to be taken into account, that was all.  He was no longer to be disregarded and ignored, as was the lot of puppies, and as continued to be the lot of the puppies that were his team-mates.  They got out of the way, gave trail to the grown dogs, and gave up meat to them under compulsion.  But White Fang, uncompanionable, solitary, morose, scarcely looking to right or left, redoubtable, forbidding of aspect, remote and alien, was accepted as an equal by his puzzled elders.  They quickly learned to leave him alone, neither venturing hostile acts nor making overtures of friendliness.  If they left him alone, he left them alone—a state of affairs that they found, after a few encounters, to be pre-eminently desirable.

In midsummer White Fang had an experience.  Trotting along in his silent way to investigate a new tepee which had been erected on the edge of the village while he was away with the hunters after moose, he came full upon Kiche.  He paused and looked at her.  He remembered her vaguely, but he remembered her, and that was more than could be said for her.  She lifted her lip at him in the old snarl of menace, and his memory became clear.  His forgotten cubhood, all that was associated with that familiar snarl, rushed back to him.  Before he had known the gods, she had been to him the centre-pin of the universe.  The old familiar feelings of that time came back upon him, surged up within him.  He bounded towards her joyously, and she met him with shrewd fangs that laid his cheek open to the bone.  He did not understand.  He backed away, bewildered and puzzled.

But it was not Kiche’s fault.  A wolf-mother was not made to remember her cubs of a year or so before.  So she did not remember White Fang.  He was a strange animal, an intruder; and her present litter of puppies gave her the right to resent such intrusion.

One of the puppies sprawled up to White Fang.  They were half-brothers, only they did not know it.  White Fang sniffed the puppy curiously, whereupon Kiche rushed upon him, gashing his face a second time.  He backed farther away.  All the old memories and associations died down again and passed into the grave from which they had been resurrected.  He looked at Kiche licking her puppy and stopping now and then to snarl at him.  She was without value to him.  He had learned to get along without her.  Her meaning was forgotten.  There was no place for her in his scheme of things, as there was no place for him in hers.

He was still standing, stupid and bewildered, the memories forgotten, wondering what it was all about, when Kiche attacked him a third time, intent on driving him away altogether from the vicinity.  And White Fang allowed himself to be driven away.  This was a female of his kind, and it was a law of his kind that the males must not fight the females.  He did not know anything about this law, for it was no generalisation of the mind, not a something acquired by experience of the world.  He knew it as a secret prompting, as an urge of instinct—of the same instinct that made him howl at the moon and stars of nights, and that made him fear death and the unknown.

The months went by.  White Fang grew stronger, heavier, and more compact, while his character was developing along the lines laid down by his heredity and his environment.  His heredity was a life-stuff that may be likened to clay.  It possessed many possibilities, was capable of being moulded into many different forms.  Environment served to model the clay, to give it a particular form.  Thus, had White Fang never come in to the fires of man, the Wild would have moulded him into a true wolf.  But the gods had given him a different environment, and he was moulded into a dog that was rather wolfish, but that was a dog and not a wolf.

And so, according to the clay of his nature and the pressure of his surroundings, his character was being moulded into a certain particular shape.  There was no escaping it.  He was becoming more morose, more uncompanionable, more solitary, more ferocious; while the dogs were learning more and more that it was better to be at peace with him than at war, and Grey Beaver was coming to prize him more greatly with the passage of each day.

White Fang, seeming to sum up strength in all his qualities, nevertheless suffered from one besetting weakness.  He could not stand being laughed at.  The laughter of men was a hateful thing.  They might laugh among themselves about anything they pleased except himself, and he did not mind.  But the moment laughter was turned upon him he would fly into a most terrible rage.  Grave, dignified, sombre, a laugh made him frantic to ridiculousness.  It so outraged him and upset him that for hours he would behave like a demon.  And woe to the dog that at such times ran foul of him.  He knew the law too well to take it out of Grey Beaver; behind Grey Beaver were a club and godhead.  But behind the dogs there was nothing but space, and into this space they flew when White Fang came on the scene, made mad by laughter.

In the third year of his life there came a great famine to the Mackenzie Indians.  In the summer the fish failed.  In the winter the cariboo forsook their accustomed track.  Moose were scarce, the rabbits almost disappeared, hunting and preying animals perished.  Denied their usual food-supply, weakened by hunger, they fell upon and devoured one another.  Only the strong survived.  White Fang’s gods were always hunting animals.  The old and the weak of them died of hunger.  There was wailing in the village, where the women and children went without in order that what little they had might go into the bellies of the lean and hollow-eyed hunters who trod the forest in the vain pursuit of meat.

To such extremity were the gods driven that they ate the soft-tanned leather of their mocassins and mittens, while the dogs ate the harnesses off their backs and the very whip-lashes.  Also, the dogs ate one another, and also the gods ate the dogs.  The weakest and the more worthless were eaten first.  The dogs that still lived, looked on and understood.  A few of the boldest and wisest forsook the fires of the gods, which had now become a shambles, and fled into the forest, where, in the end, they starved to death or were eaten by wolves.

In this time of misery, White Fang, too, stole away into the woods.  He was better fitted for the life than the other dogs, for he had the training of his cubhood to guide him.  Especially adept did he become in stalking small living things.  He would lie concealed for hours, following every movement of a cautious tree-squirrel, waiting, with a patience as huge as the hunger he suffered from, until the squirrel ventured out upon the ground.  Even then, White Fang was not premature.  He waited until he was sure of striking before the squirrel could gain a tree-refuge.  Then, and not until then, would he flash from his hiding-place, a grey projectile, incredibly swift, never failing its mark—the fleeing squirrel that fled not fast enough.

Successful as he was with squirrels, there was one difficulty that prevented him from living and growing fat on them.  There were not enough squirrels.  So he was driven to hunt still smaller things.  So acute did his hunger become at times that he was not above rooting out wood-mice from their burrows in the ground.  Nor did he scorn to do battle with a weasel as hungry as himself and many times more ferocious.

In the worst pinches of the famine he stole back to the fires of the gods.  But he did not go into the fires.  He lurked in the forest, avoiding discovery and robbing the snares at the rare intervals when game was caught.  He even robbed Grey Beaver’s snare of a rabbit at a time when Grey Beaver staggered and tottered through the forest, sitting down often to rest, what of weakness and of shortness of breath.

One day While Fang encountered a young wolf, gaunt and scrawny, loose-jointed with famine.  Had he not been hungry himself, White Fang might have gone with him and eventually found his way into the pack amongst his wild brethren.  As it was, he ran the young wolf down and killed and ate him.

Fortune seemed to favour him.  Always, when hardest pressed for food, he found something to kill.  Again, when he was weak, it was his luck that none of the larger preying animals chanced upon him.  Thus, he was strong from the two days’ eating a lynx had afforded him when the hungry wolf-pack ran full tilt upon him.  It was a long, cruel chase, but he was better nourished than they, and in the end outran them.  And not only did he outrun them, but, circling widely back on his track, he gathered in one of his exhausted pursuers.

After that he left that part of the country and journeyed over to the valley wherein he had been born.  Here, in the old lair, he encountered Kiche.  Up to her old tricks, she, too, had fled the inhospitable fires of the gods and gone back to her old refuge to give birth to her young.  Of this litter but one remained alive when White Fang came upon the scene, and this one was not destined to live long.  Young life had little chance in such a famine.

Kiche’s greeting of her grown son was anything but affectionate.  But White Fang did not mind.  He had outgrown his mother.  So he turned tail philosophically and trotted on up the stream.  At the forks he took the turning to the left, where he found the lair of the lynx with whom his mother and he had fought long before.  Here, in the abandoned lair, he settled down and rested for a day.

During the early summer, in the last days of the famine, he met Lip-lip, who had likewise taken to the woods, where he had eked out a miserable existence.

White Fang came upon him unexpectedly.  Trotting in opposite directions along the base of a high bluff, they rounded a corner of rock and found themselves face to face.  They paused with instant alarm, and looked at each other suspiciously.

White Fang was in splendid condition.  His hunting had been good, and for a week he had eaten his fill.  He was even gorged from his latest kill.  But in the moment he looked at Lip-lip his hair rose on end all along his back.  It was an involuntary bristling on his part, the physical state that in the past had always accompanied the mental state produced in him by Lip-lip’s bullying and persecution.  As in the past he had bristled and snarled at sight of Lip-lip, so now, and automatically, he bristled and snarled.  He did not waste any time.  The thing was done thoroughly and with despatch.  Lip-lip essayed to back away, but White Fang struck him hard, shoulder to shoulder.  Lip-lip was overthrown and rolled upon his back.  White Fang’s teeth drove into the scrawny throat.  There was a death-struggle, during which White Fang walked around, stiff-legged and observant.  Then he resumed his course and trotted on along the base of the bluff.

One day, not long after, he came to the edge of the forest, where a narrow stretch of open land sloped down to the Mackenzie.  He had been over this ground before, when it was bare, but now a village occupied it.  Still hidden amongst the trees, he paused to study the situation.  Sights and sounds and scents were familiar to him.  It was the old village changed to a new place.  But sights and sounds and smells were different from those he had last had when he fled away from it.  There was no whimpering nor wailing.  Contented sounds saluted his ear, and when he heard the angry voice of a woman he knew it to be the anger that proceeds from a full stomach.  And there was a smell in the air of fish.  There was food.  The famine was gone.  He came out boldly from the forest and trotted into camp straight to Grey Beaver’s tepee.  Grey Beaver was not there; but Kloo-kooch welcomed him with glad cries and the whole of a fresh-caught fish, and he lay down to wait Grey Beaver’s coming.
PART IV
CHAPTER I—THE ENEMY OF HIS KIND

Had there been in White Fang’s nature any possibility, no matter how remote, of his ever coming to fraternise with his kind, such possibility was irretrievably destroyed when he was made leader of the sled-team.  For now the dogs hated him—hated him for the extra meat bestowed upon him by Mit-sah; hated him for all the real and fancied favours he received; hated him for that he fled always at the head of the team, his waving brush of a tail and his perpetually retreating hind-quarters for ever maddening their eyes.

And White Fang just as bitterly hated them back.  Being sled-leader was anything but gratifying to him.  To be compelled to run away before the yelling pack, every dog of which, for three years, he had thrashed and mastered, was almost more than he could endure.  But endure it he must, or perish, and the life that was in him had no desire to perish out.  The moment Mit-sah gave his order for the start, that moment the whole team, with eager, savage cries, sprang forward at White Fang.

There was no defence for him.  If he turned upon them, Mit-sah would throw the stinging lash of the whip into his face.  Only remained to him to run away.  He could not encounter that howling horde with his tail and hind-quarters.  These were scarcely fit weapons with which to meet the many merciless fangs.  So run away he did, violating his own nature and pride with every leap he made, and leaping all day long.

One cannot violate the promptings of one’s nature without having that nature recoil upon itself.  Such a recoil is like that of a hair, made to grow out from the body, turning unnaturally upon the direction of its growth and growing into the body—a rankling, festering thing of hurt.  And so with White Fang.  Every urge of his being impelled him to spring upon the pack that cried at his heels, but it was the will of the gods that this should not be; and behind the will, to enforce it, was the whip of cariboo-gut with its biting thirty-foot lash.  So White Fang could only eat his heart in bitterness and develop a hatred and malice commensurate with the ferocity and indomitability of his nature.

If ever a creature was the enemy of its kind, White Fang was that creature.  He asked no quarter, gave none.  He was continually marred and scarred by the teeth of the pack, and as continually he left his own marks upon the pack.  Unlike most leaders, who, when camp was made and the dogs were unhitched, huddled near to the gods for protection, White Fang disdained such protection.  He walked boldly about the camp, inflicting punishment in the night for what he had suffered in the day.  In the time before he was made leader of the team, the pack had learned to get out of his way.  But now it was different.  Excited by the day-long pursuit of him, swayed subconsciously by the insistent iteration on their brains of the sight of him fleeing away, mastered by the feeling of mastery enjoyed all day, the dogs could not bring themselves to give way to him.  When he appeared amongst them, there was always a squabble.  His progress was marked by snarl and snap and growl.  The very atmosphere he breathed was surcharged with hatred and malice, and this but served to increase the hatred and malice within him.

When Mit-sah cried out his command for the team to stop, White Fang obeyed.  At first this caused trouble for the other dogs.  All of them would spring upon the hated leader only to find the tables turned.  Behind him would be Mit-sah, the great whip singing in his hand.  So the dogs came to understand that when the team stopped by order, White Fang was to be let alone.  But when White Fang stopped without orders, then it was allowed them to spring upon him and destroy him if they could.  After several experiences, White Fang never stopped without orders.  He learned quickly.  It was in the nature of things, that he must learn quickly if he were to survive the unusually severe conditions under which life was vouchsafed him.

But the dogs could never learn the lesson to leave him alone in camp.  Each day, pursuing him and crying defiance at him, the lesson of the previous night was erased, and that night would have to be learned over again, to be as immediately forgotten.  Besides, there was a greater consistence in their dislike of him.  They sensed between themselves and him a difference of kind—cause sufficient in itself for hostility.  Like him, they were domesticated wolves.  But they had been domesticated for generations.  Much of the Wild had been lost, so that to them the Wild was the unknown, the terrible, the ever-menacing and ever warring.  But to him, in appearance and action and impulse, still clung the Wild.  He symbolised it, was its personification: so that when they showed their teeth to him they were defending themselves against the powers of destruction that lurked in the shadows of the forest and in the dark beyond the camp-fire.

But there was one lesson the dogs did learn, and that was to keep together.  White Fang was too terrible for any of them to face single-handed.  They met him with the mass-formation, otherwise he would have killed them, one by one, in a night.  As it was, he never had a chance to kill them.  He might roll a dog off its feet, but the pack would be upon him before he could follow up and deliver the deadly throat-stroke.  At the first hint of conflict, the whole team drew together and faced him.  The dogs had quarrels among themselves, but these were forgotten when trouble was brewing with White Fang.

On the other hand, try as they would, they could not kill White Fang.  He was too quick for them, too formidable, too wise.  He avoided tight places and always backed out of it when they bade fair to surround him.  While, as for getting him off his feet, there was no dog among them capable of doing the trick.  His feet clung to the earth with the same tenacity that he clung to life.  For that matter, life and footing were synonymous in this unending warfare with the pack, and none knew it better than White Fang.

So he became the enemy of his kind, domesticated wolves that they were, softened by the fires of man, weakened in the sheltering shadow of man’s strength.  White Fang was bitter and implacable.  The clay of him was so moulded.  He declared a vendetta against all dogs.  And so terribly did he live this vendetta that Grey Beaver, fierce savage himself, could not but marvel at White Fang’s ferocity.  Never, he swore, had there been the like of this animal; and the Indians in strange villages swore likewise when they considered the tale of his killings amongst their dogs.

When White Fang was nearly five years old, Grey Beaver took him on another great journey, and long remembered was the havoc he worked amongst the dogs of the many villages along the Mackenzie, across the Rockies, and down the Porcupine to the Yukon.  He revelled in the vengeance he wreaked upon his kind.  They were ordinary, unsuspecting dogs.  They were not prepared for his swiftness and directness, for his attack without warning.  They did not know him for what he was, a lightning-flash of slaughter.  They bristled up to him, stiff-legged and challenging, while he, wasting no time on elaborate preliminaries, snapping into action like a steel spring, was at their throats and destroying them before they knew what was happening and while they were yet in the throes of surprise.

He became an adept at fighting.  He economised.  He never wasted his strength, never tussled.  He was in too quickly for that, and, if he missed, was out again too quickly.  The dislike of the wolf for close quarters was his to an unusual degree.  He could not endure a prolonged contact with another body.  It smacked of danger.  It made him frantic.  He must be away, free, on his own legs, touching no living thing.  It was the Wild still clinging to him, asserting itself through him.  This feeling had been accentuated by the Ishmaelite life he had led from his puppyhood.  Danger lurked in contacts.  It was the trap, ever the trap, the fear of it lurking deep in the life of him, woven into the fibre of him.

In consequence, the strange dogs he encountered had no chance against him.  He eluded their fangs.  He got them, or got away, himself untouched in either event.  In the natural course of things there were exceptions to this.  There were times when several dogs, pitching on to him, punished him before he could get away; and there were times when a single dog scored deeply on him.  But these were accidents.  In the main, so efficient a fighter had he become, he went his way unscathed.

Another advantage he possessed was that of correctly judging time and distance.  Not that he did this consciously, however.  He did not calculate such things.  It was all automatic.  His eyes saw correctly, and the nerves carried the vision correctly to his brain.  The parts of him were better adjusted than those of the average dog.  They worked together more smoothly and steadily.  His was a better, far better, nervous, mental, and muscular co-ordination.  When his eyes conveyed to his brain the moving image of an action, his brain without conscious effort, knew the space that limited that action and the time required for its completion.  Thus, he could avoid the leap of another dog, or the drive of its fangs, and at the same moment could seize the infinitesimal fraction of time in which to deliver his own attack.  Body and brain, his was a more perfected mechanism.  Not that he was to be praised for it.  Nature had been more generous to him than to the average animal, that was all.

It was in the summer that White Fang arrived at Fort Yukon.  Grey Beaver had crossed the great watershed between Mackenzie and the Yukon in the late winter, and spent the spring in hunting among the western outlying spurs of the Rockies.  Then, after the break-up of the ice on the Porcupine, he had built a canoe and paddled down that stream to where it effected its junction with the Yukon just under the Artic circle.  Here stood the old Hudson’s Bay Company fort; and here were many Indians, much food, and unprecedented excitement.  It was the summer of 1898, and thousands of gold-hunters were going up the Yukon to Dawson and the Klondike.  Still hundreds of miles from their goal, nevertheless many of them had been on the way for a year, and the least any of them had travelled to get that far was five thousand miles, while some had come from the other side of the world.

Here Grey Beaver stopped.  A whisper of the gold-rush had reached his ears, and he had come with several bales of furs, and another of gut-sewn mittens and moccasins.  He would not have ventured so long a trip had he not expected generous profits.  But what he had expected was nothing to what he realised.  His wildest dreams had not exceeded a hundred per cent. profit; he made a thousand per cent.  And like a true Indian, he settled down to trade carefully and slowly, even if it took all summer and the rest of the winter to dispose of his goods.

It was at Fort Yukon that White Fang saw his first white men.  As compared with the Indians he had known, they were to him another race of beings, a race of superior gods.  They impressed him as possessing superior power, and it is on power that godhead rests.  White Fang did not reason it out, did not in his mind make the sharp generalisation that the white gods were more powerful.  It was a feeling, nothing more, and yet none the less potent.  As, in his puppyhood, the looming bulks of the tepees, man-reared, had affected him as manifestations of power, so was he affected now by the houses and the huge fort all of massive logs.  Here was power.  Those white gods were strong.  They possessed greater mastery over matter than the gods he had known, most powerful among which was Grey Beaver.  And yet Grey Beaver was as a child-god among these white-skinned ones.

To be sure, White Fang only felt these things.  He was not conscious of them.  Yet it is upon feeling, more often than thinking, that animals act; and every act White Fang now performed was based upon the feeling that the white men were the superior gods.  In the first place he was very suspicious of them.  There was no telling what unknown terrors were theirs, what unknown hurts they could administer.  He was curious to observe them, fearful of being noticed by them.  For the first few hours he was content with slinking around and watching them from a safe distance.  Then he saw that no harm befell the dogs that were near to them, and he came in closer.

In turn he was an object of great curiosity to them.  His wolfish appearance caught their eyes at once, and they pointed him out to one another.  This act of pointing put White Fang on his guard, and when they tried to approach him he showed his teeth and backed away.  Not one succeeded in laying a hand on him, and it was well that they did not.

White Fang soon learned that very few of these gods—not more than a dozen—lived at this place.  Every two or three days a steamer (another and colossal manifestation of power) came into the bank and stopped for several hours.  The white men came from off these steamers and went away on them again.  There seemed untold numbers of these white men.  In the first day or so, he saw more of them than he had seen Indians in all his life; and as the days went by they continued to come up the river, stop, and then go on up the river out of sight.

But if the white gods were all-powerful, their dogs did not amount to much.  This White Fang quickly discovered by mixing with those that came ashore with their masters.  They were irregular shapes and sizes.  Some were short-legged—too short; others were long-legged—too long.  They had hair instead of fur, and a few had very little hair at that.  And none of them knew how to fight.

As an enemy of his kind, it was in White Fang’s province to fight with them.  This he did, and he quickly achieved for them a mighty contempt.  They were soft and helpless, made much noise, and floundered around clumsily trying to accomplish by main strength what he accomplished by dexterity and cunning.  They rushed bellowing at him.  He sprang to the side.  They did not know what had become of him; and in that moment he struck them on the shoulder, rolling them off their feet and delivering his stroke at the throat.

Sometimes this stroke was successful, and a stricken dog rolled in the dirt, to be pounced upon and torn to pieces by the pack of Indian dogs that waited.  White Fang was wise.  He had long since learned that the gods were made angry when their dogs were killed.  The white men were no exception to this.  So he was content, when he had overthrown and slashed wide the throat of one of their dogs, to drop back and let the pack go in and do the cruel finishing work.  It was then that the white men rushed in, visiting their wrath heavily on the pack, while White Fang went free.  He would stand off at a little distance and look on, while stones, clubs, axes, and all sorts of weapons fell upon his fellows.  White Fang was very wise.

But his fellows grew wise in their own way; and in this White Fang grew wise with them.  They learned that it was when a steamer first tied to the bank that they had their fun.  After the first two or three strange dogs had been downed and destroyed, the white men hustled their own animals back on board and wrecked savage vengeance on the offenders.  One white man, having seen his dog, a setter, torn to pieces before his eyes, drew a revolver.  He fired rapidly, six times, and six of the pack lay dead or dying—another manifestation of power that sank deep into White Fang’s consciousness.

White Fang enjoyed it all.  He did not love his kind, and he was shrewd enough to escape hurt himself.  At first, the killing of the white men’s dogs had been a diversion.  After a time it became his occupation.  There was no work for him to do.  Grey Beaver was busy trading and getting wealthy.  So White Fang hung around the landing with the disreputable gang of Indian dogs, waiting for steamers.  With the arrival of a steamer the fun began.  After a few minutes, by the time the white men had got over their surprise, the gang scattered.  The fun was over until the next steamer should arrive.

But it can scarcely be said that White Fang was a member of the gang.  He did not mingle with it, but remained aloof, always himself, and was even feared by it.  It is true, he worked with it.  He picked the quarrel with the strange dog while the gang waited.  And when he had overthrown the strange dog the gang went in to finish it.  But it is equally true that he then withdrew, leaving the gang to receive the punishment of the outraged gods.

It did not require much exertion to pick these quarrels.  All he had to do, when the strange dogs came ashore, was to show himself.  When they saw him they rushed for him.  It was their instinct.  He was the Wild—the unknown, the terrible, the ever-menacing, the thing that prowled in the darkness around the fires of the primeval world when they, cowering close to the fires, were reshaping their instincts, learning to fear the Wild out of which they had come, and which they had deserted and betrayed.  Generation by generation, down all the generations, had this fear of the Wild been stamped into their natures.  For centuries the Wild had stood for terror and destruction.  And during all this time free licence had been theirs, from their masters, to kill the things of the Wild.  In doing this they had protected both themselves and the gods whose companionship they shared.

And so, fresh from the soft southern world, these dogs, trotting down the gang-plank and out upon the Yukon shore had but to see White Fang to experience the irresistible impulse to rush upon him and destroy him.  They might be town-reared dogs, but the instinctive fear of the Wild was theirs just the same.  Not alone with their own eyes did they see the wolfish creature in the clear light of day, standing before them.  They saw him with the eyes of their ancestors, and by their inherited memory they knew White Fang for the wolf, and they remembered the ancient feud.

All of which served to make White Fang’s days enjoyable.  If the sight of him drove these strange dogs upon him, so much the better for him, so much the worse for them.  They looked upon him as legitimate prey, and as legitimate prey he looked upon them.

Not for nothing had he first seen the light of day in a lonely lair and fought his first fights with the ptarmigan, the weasel, and the lynx.  And not for nothing had his puppyhood been made bitter by the persecution of Lip-lip and the whole puppy pack.  It might have been otherwise, and he would then have been otherwise.  Had Lip-lip not existed, he would have passed his puppyhood with the other puppies and grown up more doglike and with more liking for dogs.  Had Grey Beaver possessed the plummet of affection and love, he might have sounded the deeps of White Fang’s nature and brought up to the surface all manner of kindly qualities.  But these things had not been so.  The clay of White Fang had been moulded until he became what he was, morose and lonely, unloving and ferocious, the enemy of all his kind.
CHAPTER II—THE MAD GOD

A small number of white men lived in Fort Yukon.  These men had been long in the country.  They called themselves Sour-doughs, and took great pride in so classifying themselves.  For other men, new in the land, they felt nothing but disdain.  The men who came ashore from the steamers were newcomers.  They were known as chechaquos, and they always wilted at the application of the name.  They made their bread with baking-powder.  This was the invidious distinction between them and the Sour-doughs, who, forsooth, made their bread from sour-dough because they had no baking-powder.

All of which is neither here nor there.  The men in the fort disdained the newcomers and enjoyed seeing them come to grief.  Especially did they enjoy the havoc worked amongst the newcomers’ dogs by White Fang and his disreputable gang.  When a steamer arrived, the men of the fort made it a point always to come down to the bank and see the fun.  They looked forward to it with as much anticipation as did the Indian dogs, while they were not slow to appreciate the savage and crafty part played by White Fang.

But there was one man amongst them who particularly enjoyed the sport.  He would come running at the first sound of a steamboat’s whistle; and when the last fight was over and White Fang and the pack had scattered, he would return slowly to the fort, his face heavy with regret.  Sometimes, when a soft southland dog went down, shrieking its death-cry under the fangs of the pack, this man would be unable to contain himself, and would leap into the air and cry out with delight.  And always he had a sharp and covetous eye for White Fang.

This man was called “Beauty” by the other men of the fort.  No one knew his first name, and in general he was known in the country as Beauty Smith.  But he was anything save a beauty.  To antithesis was due his naming.  He was pre-eminently unbeautiful.  Nature had been niggardly with him.  He was a small man to begin with; and upon his meagre frame was deposited an even more strikingly meagre head.  Its apex might be likened to a point.  In fact, in his boyhood, before he had been named Beauty by his fellows, he had been called “Pinhead.”

Backward, from the apex, his head slanted down to his neck and forward it slanted uncompromisingly to meet a low and remarkably wide forehead.  Beginning here, as though regretting her parsimony, Nature had spread his features with a lavish hand.  His eyes were large, and between them was the distance of two eyes.  His face, in relation to the rest of him, was prodigious.  In order to discover the necessary area, Nature had given him an enormous prognathous jaw.  It was wide and heavy, and protruded outward and down until it seemed to rest on his chest.  Possibly this appearance was due to the weariness of the slender neck, unable properly to support so great a burden.

This jaw gave the impression of ferocious determination.  But something lacked.  Perhaps it was from excess.  Perhaps the jaw was too large.  At any rate, it was a lie.  Beauty Smith was known far and wide as the weakest of weak-kneed and snivelling cowards.  To complete his description, his teeth were large and yellow, while the two eye-teeth, larger than their fellows, showed under his lean lips like fangs.  His eyes were yellow and muddy, as though Nature had run short on pigments and squeezed together the dregs of all her tubes.  It was the same with his hair, sparse and irregular of growth, muddy-yellow and dirty-yellow, rising on his head and sprouting out of his face in unexpected tufts and bunches, in appearance like clumped and wind-blown grain.

In short, Beauty Smith was a monstrosity, and the blame of it lay elsewhere.  He was not responsible.  The clay of him had been so moulded in the making.  He did the cooking for the other men in the fort, the dish-washing and the drudgery.  They did not despise him.  Rather did they tolerate him in a broad human way, as one tolerates any creature evilly treated in the making.  Also, they feared him.  His cowardly rages made them dread a shot in the back or poison in their coffee.  But somebody had to do the cooking, and whatever else his shortcomings, Beauty Smith could cook.

This was the man that looked at White Fang, delighted in his ferocious prowess, and desired to possess him.  He made overtures to White Fang from the first.  White Fang began by ignoring him.  Later on, when the overtures became more insistent, White Fang bristled and bared his teeth and backed away.  He did not like the man.  The feel of him was bad.  He sensed the evil in him, and feared the extended hand and the attempts at soft-spoken speech.  Because of all this, he hated the man.

With the simpler creatures, good and bad are things simply understood.  The good stands for all things that bring easement and satisfaction and surcease from pain.  Therefore, the good is liked.  The bad stands for all things that are fraught with discomfort, menace, and hurt, and is hated accordingly.  White Fang’s feel of Beauty Smith was bad.  From the man’s distorted body and twisted mind, in occult ways, like mists rising from malarial marshes, came emanations of the unhealth within.  Not by reasoning, not by the five senses alone, but by other and remoter and uncharted senses, came the feeling to White Fang that the man was ominous with evil, pregnant with hurtfulness, and therefore a thing bad, and wisely to be hated.

White Fang was in Grey Beaver’s camp when Beauty Smith first visited it.  At the faint sound of his distant feet, before he came in sight, White Fang knew who was coming and began to bristle.  He had been lying down in an abandon of comfort, but he arose quickly, and, as the man arrived, slid away in true wolf-fashion to the edge of the camp.  He did not know what they said, but he could see the man and Grey Beaver talking together.  Once, the man pointed at him, and White Fang snarled back as though the hand were just descending upon him instead of being, as it was, fifty feet away.  The man laughed at this; and White Fang slunk away to the sheltering woods, his head turned to observe as he glided softly over the ground.

Grey Beaver refused to sell the dog.  He had grown rich with his trading and stood in need of nothing.  Besides, White Fang was a valuable animal, the strongest sled-dog he had ever owned, and the best leader.  Furthermore, there was no dog like him on the Mackenzie nor the Yukon.  He could fight.  He killed other dogs as easily as men killed mosquitoes.  (Beauty Smith’s eyes lighted up at this, and he licked his thin lips with an eager tongue).  No, White Fang was not for sale at any price.

But Beauty Smith knew the ways of Indians.  He visited Grey Beaver’s camp often, and hidden under his coat was always a black bottle or so.  One of the potencies of whisky is the breeding of thirst.  Grey Beaver got the thirst.  His fevered membranes and burnt stomach began to clamour for more and more of the scorching fluid; while his brain, thrust all awry by the unwonted stimulant, permitted him to go any length to obtain it.  The money he had received for his furs and mittens and moccasins began to go.  It went faster and faster, and the shorter his money-sack grew, the shorter grew his temper.

In the end his money and goods and temper were all gone.  Nothing remained to him but his thirst, a prodigious possession in itself that grew more prodigious with every sober breath he drew.  Then it was that Beauty Smith had talk with him again about the sale of White Fang; but this time the price offered was in bottles, not dollars, and Grey Beaver’s ears were more eager to hear.

“You ketch um dog you take um all right,” was his last word.

The bottles were delivered, but after two days.  “You ketch um dog,” were Beauty Smith’s words to Grey Beaver.

White Fang slunk into camp one evening and dropped down with a sigh of content.  The dreaded white god was not there.  For days his manifestations of desire to lay hands on him had been growing more insistent, and during that time White Fang had been compelled to avoid the camp.  He did not know what evil was threatened by those insistent hands.  He knew only that they did threaten evil of some sort, and that it was best for him to keep out of their reach.

But scarcely had he lain down when Grey Beaver staggered over to him and tied a leather thong around his neck.  He sat down beside White Fang, holding the end of the thong in his hand.  In the other hand he held a bottle, which, from time to time, was inverted above his head to the accompaniment of gurgling noises.

An hour of this passed, when the vibrations of feet in contact with the ground foreran the one who approached.  White Fang heard it first, and he was bristling with recognition while Grey Beaver still nodded stupidly.  White Fang tried to draw the thong softly out of his master’s hand; but the relaxed fingers closed tightly and Grey Beaver roused himself.

Beauty Smith strode into camp and stood over White Fang.  He snarled softly up at the thing of fear, watching keenly the deportment of the hands.  One hand extended outward and began to descend upon his head.  His soft snarl grew tense and harsh.  The hand continued slowly to descend, while he crouched beneath it, eyeing it malignantly, his snarl growing shorter and shorter as, with quickening breath, it approached its culmination.  Suddenly he snapped, striking with his fangs like a snake.  The hand was jerked back, and the teeth came together emptily with a sharp click.  Beauty Smith was frightened and angry.  Grey Beaver clouted White Fang alongside the head, so that he cowered down close to the earth in respectful obedience.

White Fang’s suspicious eyes followed every movement.  He saw Beauty Smith go away and return with a stout club.  Then the end of the thong was given over to him by Grey Beaver.  Beauty Smith started to walk away.  The thong grew taut.  White Fang resisted it.  Grey Beaver clouted him right and left to make him get up and follow.  He obeyed, but with a rush, hurling himself upon the stranger who was dragging him away.  Beauty Smith did not jump away.  He had been waiting for this.  He swung the club smartly, stopping the rush midway and smashing White Fang down upon the ground.  Grey Beaver laughed and nodded approval.  Beauty Smith tightened the thong again, and White Fang crawled limply and dizzily to his feet.

He did not rush a second time.  One smash from the club was sufficient to convince him that the white god knew how to handle it, and he was too wise to fight the inevitable.  So he followed morosely at Beauty Smith’s heels, his tail between his legs, yet snarling softly under his breath.  But Beauty Smith kept a wary eye on him, and the club was held always ready to strike.

At the fort Beauty Smith left him securely tied and went in to bed.  White Fang waited an hour.  Then he applied his teeth to the thong, and in the space of ten seconds was free.  He had wasted no time with his teeth.  There had been no useless gnawing.  The thong was cut across, diagonally, almost as clean as though done by a knife.  White Fang looked up at the fort, at the same time bristling and growling.  Then he turned and trotted back to Grey Beaver’s camp.  He owed no allegiance to this strange and terrible god.  He had given himself to Grey Beaver, and to Grey Beaver he considered he still belonged.

But what had occurred before was repeated—with a difference.  Grey Beaver again made him fast with a thong, and in the morning turned him over to Beauty Smith.  And here was where the difference came in.  Beauty Smith gave him a beating.  Tied securely, White Fang could only rage futilely and endure the punishment.  Club and whip were both used upon him, and he experienced the worst beating he had ever received in his life.  Even the big beating given him in his puppyhood by Grey Beaver was mild compared with this.

Beauty Smith enjoyed the task.  He delighted in it.  He gloated over his victim, and his eyes flamed dully, as he swung the whip or club and listened to White Fang’s cries of pain and to his helpless bellows and snarls.  For Beauty Smith was cruel in the way that cowards are cruel.  Cringing and snivelling himself before the blows or angry speech of a man, he revenged himself, in turn, upon creatures weaker than he.  All life likes power, and Beauty Smith was no exception.  Denied the expression of power amongst his own kind, he fell back upon the lesser creatures and there vindicated the life that was in him.  But Beauty Smith had not created himself, and no blame was to be attached to him.  He had come into the world with a twisted body and a brute intelligence.  This had constituted the clay of him, and it had not been kindly moulded by the world.

White Fang knew why he was being beaten.  When Grey Beaver tied the thong around his neck, and passed the end of the thong into Beauty Smith’s keeping, White Fang knew that it was his god’s will for him to go with Beauty Smith.  And when Beauty Smith left him tied outside the fort, he knew that it was Beauty Smith’s will that he should remain there.  Therefore, he had disobeyed the will of both the gods, and earned the consequent punishment.  He had seen dogs change owners in the past, and he had seen the runaways beaten as he was being beaten.  He was wise, and yet in the nature of him there were forces greater than wisdom.  One of these was fidelity.  He did not love Grey Beaver, yet, even in the face of his will and his anger, he was faithful to him.  He could not help it.  This faithfulness was a quality of the clay that composed him.  It was the quality that was peculiarly the possession of his kind; the quality that set apart his species from all other species; the quality that has enabled the wolf and the wild dog to come in from the open and be the companions of man.

After the beating, White Fang was dragged back to the fort.  But this time Beauty Smith left him tied with a stick.  One does not give up a god easily, and so with White Fang.  Grey Beaver was his own particular god, and, in spite of Grey Beaver’s will, White Fang still clung to him and would not give him up.  Grey Beaver had betrayed and forsaken him, but that had no effect upon him.  Not for nothing had he surrendered himself body and soul to Grey Beaver.  There had been no reservation on White Fang’s part, and the bond was not to be broken easily.

So, in the night, when the men in the fort were asleep, White Fang applied his teeth to the stick that held him.  The wood was seasoned and dry, and it was tied so closely to his neck that he could scarcely get his teeth to it.  It was only by the severest muscular exertion and neck-arching that he succeeded in getting the wood between his teeth, and barely between his teeth at that; and it was only by the exercise of an immense patience, extending through many hours, that he succeeded in gnawing through the stick.  This was something that dogs were not supposed to do.  It was unprecedented.  But White Fang did it, trotting away from the fort in the early morning, with the end of the stick hanging to his neck.

He was wise.  But had he been merely wise he would not have gone back to Grey Beaver who had already twice betrayed him.  But there was his faithfulness, and he went back to be betrayed yet a third time.  Again he yielded to the tying of a thong around his neck by Grey Beaver, and again Beauty Smith came to claim him.  And this time he was beaten even more severely than before.

Grey Beaver looked on stolidly while the white man wielded the whip.  He gave no protection.  It was no longer his dog.  When the beating was over White Fang was sick.  A soft southland dog would have died under it, but not he.  His school of life had been sterner, and he was himself of sterner stuff.  He had too great vitality.  His clutch on life was too strong.  But he was very sick.  At first he was unable to drag himself along, and Beauty Smith had to wait half-an-hour for him.  And then, blind and reeling, he followed at Beauty Smith’s heels back to the fort.

But now he was tied with a chain that defied his teeth, and he strove in vain, by lunging, to draw the staple from the timber into which it was driven.  After a few days, sober and bankrupt, Grey Beaver departed up the Porcupine on his long journey to the Mackenzie.  White Fang remained on the Yukon, the property of a man more than half mad and all brute.  But what is a dog to know in its consciousness of madness?  To White Fang, Beauty Smith was a veritable, if terrible, god.  He was a mad god at best, but White Fang knew nothing of madness; he knew only that he must submit to the will of this new master, obey his every whim and fancy.
CHAPTER III—THE REIGN OF HATE

Under the tutelage of the mad god, White Fang became a fiend.  He was kept chained in a pen at the rear of the fort, and here Beauty Smith teased and irritated and drove him wild with petty torments.  The man early discovered White Fang’s susceptibility to laughter, and made it a point after painfully tricking him, to laugh at him.  This laughter was uproarious and scornful, and at the same time the god pointed his finger derisively at White Fang.  At such times reason fled from White Fang, and in his transports of rage he was even more mad than Beauty Smith.

Formerly, White Fang had been merely the enemy of his kind, withal a ferocious enemy.  He now became the enemy of all things, and more ferocious than ever.  To such an extent was he tormented, that he hated blindly and without the faintest spark of reason.  He hated the chain that bound him, the men who peered in at him through the slats of the pen, the dogs that accompanied the men and that snarled malignantly at him in his helplessness.  He hated the very wood of the pen that confined him.  And, first, last, and most of all, he hated Beauty Smith.

But Beauty Smith had a purpose in all that he did to White Fang.  One day a number of men gathered about the pen.  Beauty Smith entered, club in hand, and took the chain off from White Fang’s neck.  When his master had gone out, White Fang turned loose and tore around the pen, trying to get at the men outside.  He was magnificently terrible.  Fully five feet in length, and standing two and one-half feet at the shoulder, he far outweighed a wolf of corresponding size.  From his mother he had inherited the heavier proportions of the dog, so that he weighed, without any fat and without an ounce of superfluous flesh, over ninety pounds.  It was all muscle, bone, and sinew-fighting flesh in the finest condition.

The door of the pen was being opened again.  White Fang paused.  Something unusual was happening.  He waited.  The door was opened wider.  Then a huge dog was thrust inside, and the door was slammed shut behind him.  White Fang had never seen such a dog (it was a mastiff); but the size and fierce aspect of the intruder did not deter him.  Here was some thing, not wood nor iron, upon which to wreak his hate.  He leaped in with a flash of fangs that ripped down the side of the mastiff’s neck.  The mastiff shook his head, growled hoarsely, and plunged at White Fang.  But White Fang was here, there, and everywhere, always evading and eluding, and always leaping in and slashing with his fangs and leaping out again in time to escape punishment.

The men outside shouted and applauded, while Beauty Smith, in an ecstasy of delight, gloated over the ripping and mangling performed by White Fang.  There was no hope for the mastiff from the first.  He was too ponderous and slow.  In the end, while Beauty Smith beat White Fang back with a club, the mastiff was dragged out by its owner.  Then there was a payment of bets, and money clinked in Beauty Smith’s hand.

White Fang came to look forward eagerly to the gathering of the men around his pen.  It meant a fight; and this was the only way that was now vouchsafed him of expressing the life that was in him.  Tormented, incited to hate, he was kept a prisoner so that there was no way of satisfying that hate except at the times his master saw fit to put another dog against him.  Beauty Smith had estimated his powers well, for he was invariably the victor.  One day, three dogs were turned in upon him in succession.  Another day a full-grown wolf, fresh-caught from the Wild, was shoved in through the door of the pen.  And on still another day two dogs were set against him at the same time.  This was his severest fight, and though in the end he killed them both he was himself half killed in doing it.

In the fall of the year, when the first snows were falling and mush-ice was running in the river, Beauty Smith took passage for himself and White Fang on a steamboat bound up the Yukon to Dawson.  White Fang had now achieved a reputation in the land.  As “the Fighting Wolf” he was known far and wide, and the cage in which he was kept on the steam-boat’s deck was usually surrounded by curious men.  He raged and snarled at them, or lay quietly and studied them with cold hatred.  Why should he not hate them?  He never asked himself the question.  He knew only hate and lost himself in the passion of it.  Life had become a hell to him.  He had not been made for the close confinement wild beasts endure at the hands of men.  And yet it was in precisely this way that he was treated.  Men stared at him, poked sticks between the bars to make him snarl, and then laughed at him.

They were his environment, these men, and they were moulding the clay of him into a more ferocious thing than had been intended by Nature.  Nevertheless, Nature had given him plasticity.  Where many another animal would have died or had its spirit broken, he adjusted himself and lived, and at no expense of the spirit.  Possibly Beauty Smith, arch-fiend and tormentor, was capable of breaking White Fang’s spirit, but as yet there were no signs of his succeeding.

If Beauty Smith had in him a devil, White Fang had another; and the two of them raged against each other unceasingly.  In the days before, White Fang had had the wisdom to cower down and submit to a man with a club in his hand; but this wisdom now left him.  The mere sight of Beauty Smith was sufficient to send him into transports of fury.  And when they came to close quarters, and he had been beaten back by the club, he went on growling and snarling, and showing his fangs.  The last growl could never be extracted from him.  No matter how terribly he was beaten, he had always another growl; and when Beauty Smith gave up and withdrew, the defiant growl followed after him, or White Fang sprang at the bars of the cage bellowing his hatred.

When the steamboat arrived at Dawson, White Fang went ashore.  But he still lived a public life, in a cage, surrounded by curious men.  He was exhibited as “the Fighting Wolf,” and men paid fifty cents in gold dust to see him.  He was given no rest.  Did he lie down to sleep, he was stirred up by a sharp stick—so that the audience might get its money’s worth.  In order to make the exhibition interesting, he was kept in a rage most of the time.  But worse than all this, was the atmosphere in which he lived.  He was regarded as the most fearful of wild beasts, and this was borne in to him through the bars of the cage.  Every word, every cautious action, on the part of the men, impressed upon him his own terrible ferocity.  It was so much added fuel to the flame of his fierceness.  There could be but one result, and that was that his ferocity fed upon itself and increased.  It was another instance of the plasticity of his clay, of his capacity for being moulded by the pressure of environment.

In addition to being exhibited he was a professional fighting animal.  At irregular intervals, whenever a fight could be arranged, he was taken out of his cage and led off into the woods a few miles from town.  Usually this occurred at night, so as to avoid interference from the mounted police of the Territory.  After a few hours of waiting, when daylight had come, the audience and the dog with which he was to fight arrived.  In this manner it came about that he fought all sizes and breeds of dogs.  It was a savage land, the men were savage, and the fights were usually to the death.

Since White Fang continued to fight, it is obvious that it was the other dogs that died.  He never knew defeat.  His early training, when he fought with Lip-lip and the whole puppy-pack, stood him in good stead.  There was the tenacity with which he clung to the earth.  No dog could make him lose his footing.  This was the favourite trick of the wolf breeds—to rush in upon him, either directly or with an unexpected swerve, in the hope of striking his shoulder and overthrowing him.  Mackenzie hounds, Eskimo and Labrador dogs, huskies and Malemutes—all tried it on him, and all failed.  He was never known to lose his footing.  Men told this to one another, and looked each time to see it happen; but White Fang always disappointed them.

Then there was his lightning quickness.  It gave him a tremendous advantage over his antagonists.  No matter what their fighting experience, they had never encountered a dog that moved so swiftly as he.  Also to be reckoned with, was the immediateness of his attack.  The average dog was accustomed to the preliminaries of snarling and bristling and growling, and the average dog was knocked off his feet and finished before he had begun to fight or recovered from his surprise.  So often did this happen, that it became the custom to hold White Fang until the other dog went through its preliminaries, was good and ready, and even made the first attack.

But greatest of all the advantages in White Fang’s favour, was his experience.  He knew more about fighting than did any of the dogs that faced him.  He had fought more fights, knew how to meet more tricks and methods, and had more tricks himself, while his own method was scarcely to be improved upon.

As the time went by, he had fewer and fewer fights.  Men despaired of matching him with an equal, and Beauty Smith was compelled to pit wolves against him.  These were trapped by the Indians for the purpose, and a fight between White Fang and a wolf was always sure to draw a crowd.  Once, a full-grown female lynx was secured, and this time White Fang fought for his life.  Her quickness matched his; her ferocity equalled his; while he fought with his fangs alone, and she fought with her sharp-clawed feet as well.

But after the lynx, all fighting ceased for White Fang.  There were no more animals with which to fight—at least, there was none considered worthy of fighting with him.  So he remained on exhibition until spring, when one Tim Keenan, a faro-dealer, arrived in the land.  With him came the first bull-dog that had ever entered the Klondike.  That this dog and White Fang should come together was inevitable, and for a week the anticipated fight was the mainspring of conversation in certain quarters of the town.
CHAPTER IV—THE CLINGING DEATH

Beauty Smith slipped the chain from his neck and stepped back.

For once White Fang did not make an immediate attack.  He stood still, ears pricked forward, alert and curious, surveying the strange animal that faced him.  He had never seen such a dog before.  Tim Keenan shoved the bull-dog forward with a muttered “Go to it.”  The animal waddled toward the centre of the circle, short and squat and ungainly.  He came to a stop and blinked across at White Fang.

There were cries from the crowd of, “Go to him, Cherokee!  Sick ’m, Cherokee!  Eat ’m up!”

But Cherokee did not seem anxious to fight.  He turned his head and blinked at the men who shouted, at the same time wagging his stump of a tail good-naturedly.  He was not afraid, but merely lazy.  Besides, it did not seem to him that it was intended he should fight with the dog he saw before him.  He was not used to fighting with that kind of dog, and he was waiting for them to bring on the real dog.

Tim Keenan stepped in and bent over Cherokee, fondling him on both sides of the shoulders with hands that rubbed against the grain of the hair and that made slight, pushing-forward movements.  These were so many suggestions.  Also, their effect was irritating, for Cherokee began to growl, very softly, deep down in his throat.  There was a correspondence in rhythm between the growls and the movements of the man’s hands.  The growl rose in the throat with the culmination of each forward-pushing movement, and ebbed down to start up afresh with the beginning of the next movement.  The end of each movement was the accent of the rhythm, the movement ending abruptly and the growling rising with a jerk.

This was not without its effect on White Fang.  The hair began to rise on his neck and across the shoulders.  Tim Keenan gave a final shove forward and stepped back again.  As the impetus that carried Cherokee forward died down, he continued to go forward of his own volition, in a swift, bow-legged run.  Then White Fang struck.  A cry of startled admiration went up.  He had covered the distance and gone in more like a cat than a dog; and with the same cat-like swiftness he had slashed with his fangs and leaped clear.

The bull-dog was bleeding back of one ear from a rip in his thick neck.  He gave no sign, did not even snarl, but turned and followed after White Fang.  The display on both sides, the quickness of the one and the steadiness of the other, had excited the partisan spirit of the crowd, and the men were making new bets and increasing original bets.  Again, and yet again, White Fang sprang in, slashed, and got away untouched, and still his strange foe followed after him, without too great haste, not slowly, but deliberately and determinedly, in a businesslike sort of way.  There was purpose in his method—something for him to do that he was intent upon doing and from which nothing could distract him.

His whole demeanour, every action, was stamped with this purpose.  It puzzled White Fang.  Never had he seen such a dog.  It had no hair protection.  It was soft, and bled easily.  There was no thick mat of fur to baffle White Fang’s teeth as they were often baffled by dogs of his own breed.  Each time that his teeth struck they sank easily into the yielding flesh, while the animal did not seem able to defend itself.  Another disconcerting thing was that it made no outcry, such as he had been accustomed to with the other dogs he had fought.  Beyond a growl or a grunt, the dog took its punishment silently.  And never did it flag in its pursuit of him.

Not that Cherokee was slow.  He could turn and whirl swiftly enough, but White Fang was never there.  Cherokee was puzzled, too.  He had never fought before with a dog with which he could not close.  The desire to close had always been mutual.  But here was a dog that kept at a distance, dancing and dodging here and there and all about.  And when it did get its teeth into him, it did not hold on but let go instantly and darted away again.

But White Fang could not get at the soft underside of the throat.  The bull-dog stood too short, while its massive jaws were an added protection.  White Fang darted in and out unscathed, while Cherokee’s wounds increased.  Both sides of his neck and head were ripped and slashed.  He bled freely, but showed no signs of being disconcerted.  He continued his plodding pursuit, though once, for the moment baffled, he came to a full stop and blinked at the men who looked on, at the same time wagging his stump of a tail as an expression of his willingness to fight.

In that moment White Fang was in upon him and out, in passing ripping his trimmed remnant of an ear.  With a slight manifestation of anger, Cherokee took up the pursuit again, running on the inside of the circle White Fang was making, and striving to fasten his deadly grip on White Fang’s throat.  The bull-dog missed by a hair’s-breadth, and cries of praise went up as White Fang doubled suddenly out of danger in the opposite direction.

The time went by.  White Fang still danced on, dodging and doubling, leaping in and out, and ever inflicting damage.  And still the bull-dog, with grim certitude, toiled after him.  Sooner or later he would accomplish his purpose, get the grip that would win the battle.  In the meantime, he accepted all the punishment the other could deal him.  His tufts of ears had become tassels, his neck and shoulders were slashed in a score of places, and his very lips were cut and bleeding—all from these lightning snaps that were beyond his foreseeing and guarding.

Time and again White Fang had attempted to knock Cherokee off his feet; but the difference in their height was too great.  Cherokee was too squat, too close to the ground.  White Fang tried the trick once too often.  The chance came in one of his quick doublings and counter-circlings.  He caught Cherokee with head turned away as he whirled more slowly.  His shoulder was exposed.  White Fang drove in upon it: but his own shoulder was high above, while he struck with such force that his momentum carried him on across over the other’s body.  For the first time in his fighting history, men saw White Fang lose his footing.  His body turned a half-somersault in the air, and he would have landed on his back had he not twisted, catlike, still in the air, in the effort to bring his feet to the earth.  As it was, he struck heavily on his side.  The next instant he was on his feet, but in that instant Cherokee’s teeth closed on his throat.

It was not a good grip, being too low down toward the chest; but Cherokee held on.  White Fang sprang to his feet and tore wildly around, trying to shake off the bull-dog’s body.  It made him frantic, this clinging, dragging weight.  It bound his movements, restricted his freedom.  It was like the trap, and all his instinct resented it and revolted against it.  It was a mad revolt.  For several minutes he was to all intents insane.  The basic life that was in him took charge of him.  The will to exist of his body surged over him.  He was dominated by this mere flesh-love of life.  All intelligence was gone.  It was as though he had no brain.  His reason was unseated by the blind yearning of the flesh to exist and move, at all hazards to move, to continue to move, for movement was the expression of its existence.

Round and round he went, whirling and turning and reversing, trying to shake off the fifty-pound weight that dragged at his throat.  The bull-dog did little but keep his grip.  Sometimes, and rarely, he managed to get his feet to the earth and for a moment to brace himself against White Fang.  But the next moment his footing would be lost and he would be dragging around in the whirl of one of White Fang’s mad gyrations.  Cherokee identified himself with his instinct.  He knew that he was doing the right thing by holding on, and there came to him certain blissful thrills of satisfaction.  At such moments he even closed his eyes and allowed his body to be hurled hither and thither, willy-nilly, careless of any hurt that might thereby come to it.  That did not count.  The grip was the thing, and the grip he kept.

White Fang ceased only when he had tired himself out.  He could do nothing, and he could not understand.  Never, in all his fighting, had this thing happened.  The dogs he had fought with did not fight that way.  With them it was snap and slash and get away, snap and slash and get away.  He lay partly on his side, panting for breath.  Cherokee still holding his grip, urged against him, trying to get him over entirely on his side.  White Fang resisted, and he could feel the jaws shifting their grip, slightly relaxing and coming together again in a chewing movement.  Each shift brought the grip closer to his throat.  The bull-dog’s method was to hold what he had, and when opportunity favoured to work in for more.  Opportunity favoured when White Fang remained quiet.  When White Fang struggled, Cherokee was content merely to hold on.

The bulging back of Cherokee’s neck was the only portion of his body that White Fang’s teeth could reach.  He got hold toward the base where the neck comes out from the shoulders; but he did not know the chewing method of fighting, nor were his jaws adapted to it.  He spasmodically ripped and tore with his fangs for a space.  Then a change in their position diverted him.  The bull-dog had managed to roll him over on his back, and still hanging on to his throat, was on top of him.  Like a cat, White Fang bowed his hind-quarters in, and, with the feet digging into his enemy’s abdomen above him, he began to claw with long tearing-strokes.  Cherokee might well have been disembowelled had he not quickly pivoted on his grip and got his body off of White Fang’s and at right angles to it.

There was no escaping that grip.  It was like Fate itself, and as inexorable.  Slowly it shifted up along the jugular.  All that saved White Fang from death was the loose skin of his neck and the thick fur that covered it.  This served to form a large roll in Cherokee’s mouth, the fur of which well-nigh defied his teeth.  But bit by bit, whenever the chance offered, he was getting more of the loose skin and fur in his mouth.  The result was that he was slowly throttling White Fang.  The latter’s breath was drawn with greater and greater difficulty as the moments went by.

It began to look as though the battle were over.  The backers of Cherokee waxed jubilant and offered ridiculous odds.  White Fang’s backers were correspondingly depressed, and refused bets of ten to one and twenty to one, though one man was rash enough to close a wager of fifty to one.  This man was Beauty Smith.  He took a step into the ring and pointed his finger at White Fang.  Then he began to laugh derisively and scornfully.  This produced the desired effect.  White Fang went wild with rage.  He called up his reserves of strength, and gained his feet.  As he struggled around the ring, the fifty pounds of his foe ever dragging on his throat, his anger passed on into panic.  The basic life of him dominated him again, and his intelligence fled before the will of his flesh to live.  Round and round and back again, stumbling and falling and rising, even uprearing at times on his hind-legs and lifting his foe clear of the earth, he struggled vainly to shake off the clinging death.

At last he fell, toppling backward, exhausted; and the bull-dog promptly shifted his grip, getting in closer, mangling more and more of the fur-folded flesh, throttling White Fang more severely than ever.  Shouts of applause went up for the victor, and there were many cries of “Cherokee!” “Cherokee!”  To this Cherokee responded by vigorous wagging of the stump of his tail.  But the clamour of approval did not distract him.  There was no sympathetic relation between his tail and his massive jaws.  The one might wag, but the others held their terrible grip on White Fang’s throat.

It was at this time that a diversion came to the spectators.  There was a jingle of bells.  Dog-mushers’ cries were heard.  Everybody, save Beauty Smith, looked apprehensively, the fear of the police strong upon them.  But they saw, up the trail, and not down, two men running with sled and dogs.  They were evidently coming down the creek from some prospecting trip.  At sight of the crowd they stopped their dogs and came over and joined it, curious to see the cause of the excitement.  The dog-musher wore a moustache, but the other, a taller and younger man, was smooth-shaven, his skin rosy from the pounding of his blood and the running in the frosty air.

White Fang had practically ceased struggling.  Now and again he resisted spasmodically and to no purpose.  He could get little air, and that little grew less and less under the merciless grip that ever tightened.  In spite of his armour of fur, the great vein of his throat would have long since been torn open, had not the first grip of the bull-dog been so low down as to be practically on the chest.  It had taken Cherokee a long time to shift that grip upward, and this had also tended further to clog his jaws with fur and skin-fold.

In the meantime, the abysmal brute in Beauty Smith had been rising into his brain and mastering the small bit of sanity that he possessed at best.  When he saw White Fang’s eyes beginning to glaze, he knew beyond doubt that the fight was lost.  Then he broke loose.  He sprang upon White Fang and began savagely to kick him.  There were hisses from the crowd and cries of protest, but that was all.  While this went on, and Beauty Smith continued to kick White Fang, there was a commotion in the crowd.  The tall young newcomer was forcing his way through, shouldering men right and left without ceremony or gentleness.  When he broke through into the ring, Beauty Smith was just in the act of delivering another kick.  All his weight was on one foot, and he was in a state of unstable equilibrium.  At that moment the newcomer’s fist landed a smashing blow full in his face.  Beauty Smith’s remaining leg left the ground, and his whole body seemed to lift into the air as he turned over backward and struck the snow.  The newcomer turned upon the crowd.

“You cowards!” he cried.  “You beasts!”

He was in a rage himself—a sane rage.  His grey eyes seemed metallic and steel-like as they flashed upon the crowd.  Beauty Smith regained his feet and came toward him, sniffling and cowardly.  The new-comer did not understand.  He did not know how abject a coward the other was, and thought he was coming back intent on fighting.  So, with a “You beast!” he smashed Beauty Smith over backward with a second blow in the face.  Beauty Smith decided that the snow was the safest place for him, and lay where he had fallen, making no effort to get up.

“Come on, Matt, lend a hand,” the newcomer called the dog-musher, who had followed him into the ring.

Both men bent over the dogs.  Matt took hold of White Fang, ready to pull when Cherokee’s jaws should be loosened.  This the younger man endeavoured to accomplish by clutching the bulldog’s jaws in his hands and trying to spread them.  It was a vain undertaking.  As he pulled and tugged and wrenched, he kept exclaiming with every expulsion of breath, “Beasts!”

The crowd began to grow unruly, and some of the men were protesting against the spoiling of the sport; but they were silenced when the newcomer lifted his head from his work for a moment and glared at them.

“You damn beasts!” he finally exploded, and went back to his task.

“It’s no use, Mr. Scott, you can’t break ’m apart that way,” Matt said at last.

The pair paused and surveyed the locked dogs.

“Ain’t bleedin’ much,” Matt announced.  “Ain’t got all the way in yet.”

“But he’s liable to any moment,” Scott answered.  “There, did you see that!  He shifted his grip in a bit.”

The younger man’s excitement and apprehension for White Fang was growing.  He struck Cherokee about the head savagely again and again.  But that did not loosen the jaws.  Cherokee wagged the stump of his tail in advertisement that he understood the meaning of the blows, but that he knew he was himself in the right and only doing his duty by keeping his grip.

“Won’t some of you help?” Scott cried desperately at the crowd.

But no help was offered.  Instead, the crowd began sarcastically to cheer him on and showered him with facetious advice.

“You’ll have to get a pry,” Matt counselled.

The other reached into the holster at his hip, drew his revolver, and tried to thrust its muzzle between the bull-dog’s jaws.  He shoved, and shoved hard, till the grating of the steel against the locked teeth could be distinctly heard.  Both men were on their knees, bending over the dogs.  Tim Keenan strode into the ring.  He paused beside Scott and touched him on the shoulder, saying ominously:

“Don’t break them teeth, stranger.”

“Then I’ll break his neck,” Scott retorted, continuing his shoving and wedging with the revolver muzzle.

“I said don’t break them teeth,” the faro-dealer repeated more ominously than before.

But if it was a bluff he intended, it did not work.  Scott never desisted from his efforts, though he looked up coolly and asked:

“Your dog?”

The faro-dealer grunted.

“Then get in here and break this grip.”

“Well, stranger,” the other drawled irritatingly, “I don’t mind telling you that’s something I ain’t worked out for myself.  I don’t know how to turn the trick.”

“Then get out of the way,” was the reply, “and don’t bother me.  I’m busy.”

Tim Keenan continued standing over him, but Scott took no further notice of his presence.  He had managed to get the muzzle in between the jaws on one side, and was trying to get it out between the jaws on the other side.  This accomplished, he pried gently and carefully, loosening the jaws a bit at a time, while Matt, a bit at a time, extricated White Fang’s mangled neck.

“Stand by to receive your dog,” was Scott’s peremptory order to Cherokee’s owner.

The faro-dealer stooped down obediently and got a firm hold on Cherokee.

“Now!” Scott warned, giving the final pry.

The dogs were drawn apart, the bull-dog struggling vigorously.

“Take him away,” Scott commanded, and Tim Keenan dragged Cherokee back into the crowd.

White Fang made several ineffectual efforts to get up.  Once he gained his feet, but his legs were too weak to sustain him, and he slowly wilted and sank back into the snow.  His eyes were half closed, and the surface of them was glassy.  His jaws were apart, and through them the tongue protruded, draggled and limp.  To all appearances he looked like a dog that had been strangled to death.  Matt examined him.

“Just about all in,” he announced; “but he’s breathin’ all right.”

Beauty Smith had regained his feet and come over to look at White Fang.

“Matt, how much is a good sled-dog worth?” Scott asked.

The dog-musher, still on his knees and stooped over White Fang, calculated for a moment.

“Three hundred dollars,” he answered.

“And how much for one that’s all chewed up like this one?” Scott asked, nudging White Fang with his foot.

“Half of that,” was the dog-musher’s judgment.  Scott turned upon Beauty Smith.

“Did you hear, Mr. Beast?  I’m going to take your dog from you, and I’m going to give you a hundred and fifty for him.”

He opened his pocket-book and counted out the bills.

Beauty Smith put his hands behind his back, refusing to touch the proffered money.

“I ain’t a-sellin’,” he said.

“Oh, yes you are,” the other assured him.  “Because I’m buying.  Here’s your money.  The dog’s mine.”

Beauty Smith, his hands still behind him, began to back away.

Scott sprang toward him, drawing his fist back to strike.  Beauty Smith cowered down in anticipation of the blow.

“I’ve got my rights,” he whimpered.

“You’ve forfeited your rights to own that dog,” was the rejoinder.  “Are you going to take the money? or do I have to hit you again?”

“All right,” Beauty Smith spoke up with the alacrity of fear.  “But I take the money under protest,” he added.  “The dog’s a mint.  I ain’t a-goin’ to be robbed.  A man’s got his rights.”

“Correct,” Scott answered, passing the money over to him.  “A man’s got his rights.  But you’re not a man.  You’re a beast.”

“Wait till I get back to Dawson,” Beauty Smith threatened.  “I’ll have the law on you.”

“If you open your mouth when you get back to Dawson, I’ll have you run out of town.  Understand?”

Beauty Smith replied with a grunt.

“Understand?” the other thundered with abrupt fierceness.

“Yes,” Beauty Smith grunted, shrinking away.

“Yes what?”

“Yes, sir,” Beauty Smith snarled.

“Look out!  He’ll bite!” some one shouted, and a guffaw of laughter went up.

Scott turned his back on him, and returned to help the dog-musher, who was working over White Fang.

Some of the men were already departing; others stood in groups, looking on and talking.  Tim Keenan joined one of the groups.

“Who’s that mug?” he asked.

“Weedon Scott,” some one answered.

“And who in hell is Weedon Scott?” the faro-dealer demanded.

“Oh, one of them crackerjack minin’ experts.  He’s in with all the big bugs.  If you want to keep out of trouble, you’ll steer clear of him, that’s my talk.  He’s all hunky with the officials.  The Gold Commissioner’s a special pal of his.”

“I thought he must be somebody,” was the faro-dealer’s comment.  “That’s why I kept my hands offen him at the start.”
CHAPTER V—THE INDOMITABLE

“It’s hopeless,” Weedon Scott confessed.

He sat on the step of his cabin and stared at the dog-musher, who responded with a shrug that was equally hopeless.

Together they looked at White Fang at the end of his stretched chain, bristling, snarling, ferocious, straining to get at the sled-dogs.  Having received sundry lessons from Matt, said lessons being imparted by means of a club, the sled-dogs had learned to leave White Fang alone; and even then they were lying down at a distance, apparently oblivious of his existence.

“It’s a wolf and there’s no taming it,” Weedon Scott announced.

“Oh, I don’t know about that,” Matt objected.  “Might be a lot of dog in ’m, for all you can tell.  But there’s one thing I know sure, an’ that there’s no gettin’ away from.”

The dog-musher paused and nodded his head confidentially at Moosehide Mountain.

“Well, don’t be a miser with what you know,” Scott said sharply, after waiting a suitable length of time.  “Spit it out.  What is it?”

The dog-musher indicated White Fang with a backward thrust of his thumb.

“Wolf or dog, it’s all the same—he’s ben tamed ’ready.”

“No!”

“I tell you yes, an’ broke to harness.  Look close there.  D’ye see them marks across the chest?”

“You’re right, Matt.  He was a sled-dog before Beauty Smith got hold of him.”

“And there’s not much reason against his bein’ a sled-dog again.”

“What d’ye think?” Scott queried eagerly.  Then the hope died down as he added, shaking his head, “We’ve had him two weeks now, and if anything he’s wilder than ever at the present moment.”

“Give ’m a chance,” Matt counselled.  “Turn ’m loose for a spell.”

The other looked at him incredulously.

“Yes,” Matt went on, “I know you’ve tried to, but you didn’t take a club.”

“You try it then.”

The dog-musher secured a club and went over to the chained animal.  White Fang watched the club after the manner of a caged lion watching the whip of its trainer.

“See ’m keep his eye on that club,” Matt said.  “That’s a good sign.  He’s no fool.  Don’t dast tackle me so long as I got that club handy.  He’s not clean crazy, sure.”

As the man’s hand approached his neck, White Fang bristled and snarled and crouched down.  But while he eyed the approaching hand, he at the same time contrived to keep track of the club in the other hand, suspended threateningly above him.  Matt unsnapped the chain from the collar and stepped back.

White Fang could scarcely realise that he was free.  Many months had gone by since he passed into the possession of Beauty Smith, and in all that period he had never known a moment of freedom except at the times he had been loosed to fight with other dogs.  Immediately after such fights he had always been imprisoned again.

He did not know what to make of it.  Perhaps some new devilry of the gods was about to be perpetrated on him.  He walked slowly and cautiously, prepared to be assailed at any moment.  He did not know what to do, it was all so unprecedented.  He took the precaution to sheer off from the two watching gods, and walked carefully to the corner of the cabin.  Nothing happened.  He was plainly perplexed, and he came back again, pausing a dozen feet away and regarding the two men intently.

“Won’t he run away?” his new owner asked.

Matt shrugged his shoulders.  “Got to take a gamble.  Only way to find out is to find out.”

“Poor devil,” Scott murmured pityingly.  “What he needs is some show of human kindness,” he added, turning and going into the cabin.

He came out with a piece of meat, which he tossed to White Fang.  He sprang away from it, and from a distance studied it suspiciously.

“Hi-yu, Major!” Matt shouted warningly, but too late.

Major had made a spring for the meat.  At the instant his jaws closed on it, White Fang struck him.  He was overthrown.  Matt rushed in, but quicker than he was White Fang.  Major staggered to his feet, but the blood spouting from his throat reddened the snow in a widening path.

“It’s too bad, but it served him right,” Scott said hastily.

But Matt’s foot had already started on its way to kick White Fang.  There was a leap, a flash of teeth, a sharp exclamation.  White Fang, snarling fiercely, scrambled backward for several yards, while Matt stooped and investigated his leg.

“He got me all right,” he announced, pointing to the torn trousers and undercloths, and the growing stain of red.

“I told you it was hopeless, Matt,” Scott said in a discouraged voice.  “I’ve thought about it off and on, while not wanting to think of it.  But we’ve come to it now.  It’s the only thing to do.”

As he talked, with reluctant movements he drew his revolver, threw open the cylinder, and assured himself of its contents.

“Look here, Mr. Scott,” Matt objected; “that dog’s ben through hell.  You can’t expect ’m to come out a white an’ shinin’ angel.  Give ’m time.”

“Look at Major,” the other rejoined.

The dog-musher surveyed the stricken dog.  He had sunk down on the snow in the circle of his blood and was plainly in the last gasp.

“Served ’m right.  You said so yourself, Mr. Scott.  He tried to take White Fang’s meat, an’ he’s dead-O.  That was to be expected.  I wouldn’t give two whoops in hell for a dog that wouldn’t fight for his own meat.”

“But look at yourself, Matt.  It’s all right about the dogs, but we must draw the line somewhere.”

“Served me right,” Matt argued stubbornly.  “What’d I want to kick ’m for?  You said yourself that he’d done right.  Then I had no right to kick ’m.”

“It would be a mercy to kill him,” Scott insisted.  “He’s untamable.”

“Now look here, Mr. Scott, give the poor devil a fightin’ chance.  He ain’t had no chance yet.  He’s just come through hell, an’ this is the first time he’s ben loose.  Give ’m a fair chance, an’ if he don’t deliver the goods, I’ll kill ’m myself.  There!”

“God knows I don’t want to kill him or have him killed,” Scott answered, putting away the revolver.  “We’ll let him run loose and see what kindness can do for him.  And here’s a try at it.”

He walked over to White Fang and began talking to him gently and soothingly.

“Better have a club handy,” Matt warned.

Scott shook his head and went on trying to win White Fang’s confidence.

White Fang was suspicious.  Something was impending.  He had killed this god’s dog, bitten his companion god, and what else was to be expected than some terrible punishment?  But in the face of it he was indomitable.  He bristled and showed his teeth, his eyes vigilant, his whole body wary and prepared for anything.  The god had no club, so he suffered him to approach quite near.  The god’s hand had come out and was descending upon his head.  White Fang shrank together and grew tense as he crouched under it.  Here was danger, some treachery or something.  He knew the hands of the gods, their proved mastery, their cunning to hurt.  Besides, there was his old antipathy to being touched.  He snarled more menacingly, crouched still lower, and still the hand descended.  He did not want to bite the hand, and he endured the peril of it until his instinct surged up in him, mastering him with its insatiable yearning for life.

Weedon Scott had believed that he was quick enough to avoid any snap or slash.  But he had yet to learn the remarkable quickness of White Fang, who struck with the certainty and swiftness of a coiled snake.

Scott cried out sharply with surprise, catching his torn hand and holding it tightly in his other hand.  Matt uttered a great oath and sprang to his side.  White Fang crouched down, and backed away, bristling, showing his fangs, his eyes malignant with menace.  Now he could expect a beating as fearful as any he had received from Beauty Smith.

“Here!  What are you doing?” Scott cried suddenly.

Matt had dashed into the cabin and come out with a rifle.

“Nothin’,” he said slowly, with a careless calmness that was assumed, “only goin’ to keep that promise I made.  I reckon it’s up to me to kill ’m as I said I’d do.”

“No you don’t!”

“Yes I do.  Watch me.”

As Matt had pleaded for White Fang when he had been bitten, it was now Weedon Scott’s turn to plead.

“You said to give him a chance.  Well, give it to him.  We’ve only just started, and we can’t quit at the beginning.  It served me right, this time.  And—look at him!”

White Fang, near the corner of the cabin and forty feet away, was snarling with blood-curdling viciousness, not at Scott, but at the dog-musher.

“Well, I’ll be everlastingly gosh-swoggled!” was the dog-musher’s expression of astonishment.

“Look at the intelligence of him,” Scott went on hastily.  “He knows the meaning of firearms as well as you do.  He’s got intelligence and we’ve got to give that intelligence a chance.  Put up the gun.”

“All right, I’m willin’,” Matt agreed, leaning the rifle against the woodpile.

“But will you look at that!” he exclaimed the next moment.

White Fang had quieted down and ceased snarling.  “This is worth investigatin’.  Watch.”

Matt, reached for the rifle, and at the same moment White Fang snarled.  He stepped away from the rifle, and White Fang’s lifted lips descended, covering his teeth.

“Now, just for fun.”

Matt took the rifle and began slowly to raise it to his shoulder.  White Fang’s snarling began with the movement, and increased as the movement approached its culmination.  But the moment before the rifle came to a level on him, he leaped sidewise behind the corner of the cabin.  Matt stood staring along the sights at the empty space of snow which had been occupied by White Fang.

The dog-musher put the rifle down solemnly, then turned and looked at his employer.

“I agree with you, Mr. Scott.  That dog’s too intelligent to kill.”
CHAPTER VI—THE LOVE-MASTER

As White Fang watched Weedon Scott approach, he bristled and snarled to advertise that he would not submit to punishment.  Twenty-four hours had passed since he had slashed open the hand that was now bandaged and held up by a sling to keep the blood out of it.  In the past White Fang had experienced delayed punishments, and he apprehended that such a one was about to befall him.  How could it be otherwise?  He had committed what was to him sacrilege, sunk his fangs into the holy flesh of a god, and of a white-skinned superior god at that.  In the nature of things, and of intercourse with gods, something terrible awaited him.

The god sat down several feet away.  White Fang could see nothing dangerous in that.  When the gods administered punishment they stood on their legs.  Besides, this god had no club, no whip, no firearm.  And furthermore, he himself was free.  No chain nor stick bound him.  He could escape into safety while the god was scrambling to his feet.  In the meantime he would wait and see.

The god remained quiet, made no movement; and White Fang’s snarl slowly dwindled to a growl that ebbed down in his throat and ceased.  Then the god spoke, and at the first sound of his voice, the hair rose on White Fang’s neck and the growl rushed up in his throat.  But the god made no hostile movement, and went on calmly talking.  For a time White Fang growled in unison with him, a correspondence of rhythm being established between growl and voice.  But the god talked on interminably.  He talked to White Fang as White Fang had never been talked to before.  He talked softly and soothingly, with a gentleness that somehow, somewhere, touched White Fang.  In spite of himself and all the pricking warnings of his instinct, White Fang began to have confidence in this god.  He had a feeling of security that was belied by all his experience with men.

After a long time, the god got up and went into the cabin.  White Fang scanned him apprehensively when he came out.  He had neither whip nor club nor weapon.  Nor was his uninjured hand behind his back hiding something.  He sat down as before, in the same spot, several feet away.  He held out a small piece of meat.  White Fang pricked his ears and investigated it suspiciously, managing to look at the same time both at the meat and the god, alert for any overt act, his body tense and ready to spring away at the first sign of hostility.

Still the punishment delayed.  The god merely held near to his nose a piece of meat.  And about the meat there seemed nothing wrong.  Still White Fang suspected; and though the meat was proffered to him with short inviting thrusts of the hand, he refused to touch it.  The gods were all-wise, and there was no telling what masterful treachery lurked behind that apparently harmless piece of meat.  In past experience, especially in dealing with squaws, meat and punishment had often been disastrously related.

In the end, the god tossed the meat on the snow at White Fang’s feet.  He smelled the meat carefully; but he did not look at it.  While he smelled it he kept his eyes on the god.  Nothing happened.  He took the meat into his mouth and swallowed it.  Still nothing happened.  The god was actually offering him another piece of meat.  Again he refused to take it from the hand, and again it was tossed to him.  This was repeated a number of times.  But there came a time when the god refused to toss it.  He kept it in his hand and steadfastly proffered it.

The meat was good meat, and White Fang was hungry.  Bit by bit, infinitely cautious, he approached the hand.  At last the time came that he decided to eat the meat from the hand.  He never took his eyes from the god, thrusting his head forward with ears flattened back and hair involuntarily rising and cresting on his neck.  Also a low growl rumbled in his throat as warning that he was not to be trifled with.  He ate the meat, and nothing happened.  Piece by piece, he ate all the meat, and nothing happened.  Still the punishment delayed.

He licked his chops and waited.  The god went on talking.  In his voice was kindness—something of which White Fang had no experience whatever.  And within him it aroused feelings which he had likewise never experienced before.  He was aware of a certain strange satisfaction, as though some need were being gratified, as though some void in his being were being filled.  Then again came the prod of his instinct and the warning of past experience.  The gods were ever crafty, and they had unguessed ways of attaining their ends.

Ah, he had thought so!  There it came now, the god’s hand, cunning to hurt, thrusting out at him, descending upon his head.  But the god went on talking.  His voice was soft and soothing.  In spite of the menacing hand, the voice inspired confidence.  And in spite of the assuring voice, the hand inspired distrust.  White Fang was torn by conflicting feelings, impulses.  It seemed he would fly to pieces, so terrible was the control he was exerting, holding together by an unwonted indecision the counter-forces that struggled within him for mastery.

He compromised.  He snarled and bristled and flattened his ears.  But he neither snapped nor sprang away.  The hand descended.  Nearer and nearer it came.  It touched the ends of his upstanding hair.  He shrank down under it.  It followed down after him, pressing more closely against him.  Shrinking, almost shivering, he still managed to hold himself together.  It was a torment, this hand that touched him and violated his instinct.  He could not forget in a day all the evil that had been wrought him at the hands of men.  But it was the will of the god, and he strove to submit.

The hand lifted and descended again in a patting, caressing movement.  This continued, but every time the hand lifted, the hair lifted under it.  And every time the hand descended, the ears flattened down and a cavernous growl surged in his throat.  White Fang growled and growled with insistent warning.  By this means he announced that he was prepared to retaliate for any hurt he might receive.  There was no telling when the god’s ulterior motive might be disclosed.  At any moment that soft, confidence-inspiring voice might break forth in a roar of wrath, that gentle and caressing hand transform itself into a vice-like grip to hold him helpless and administer punishment.

But the god talked on softly, and ever the hand rose and fell with non-hostile pats.  White Fang experienced dual feelings.  It was distasteful to his instinct.  It restrained him, opposed the will of him toward personal liberty.  And yet it was not physically painful.  On the contrary, it was even pleasant, in a physical way.  The patting movement slowly and carefully changed to a rubbing of the ears about their bases, and the physical pleasure even increased a little.  Yet he continued to fear, and he stood on guard, expectant of unguessed evil, alternately suffering and enjoying as one feeling or the other came uppermost and swayed him.

“Well, I’ll be gosh-swoggled!”

So spoke Matt, coming out of the cabin, his sleeves rolled up, a pan of dirty dish-water in his hands, arrested in the act of emptying the pan by the sight of Weedon Scott patting White Fang.

At the instant his voice broke the silence, White Fang leaped back, snarling savagely at him.

Matt regarded his employer with grieved disapproval.

“If you don’t mind my expressin’ my feelin’s, Mr. Scott, I’ll make free to say you’re seventeen kinds of a damn fool an’ all of ’em different, an’ then some.”

Weedon Scott smiled with a superior air, gained his feet, and walked over to White Fang.  He talked soothingly to him, but not for long, then slowly put out his hand, rested it on White Fang’s head, and resumed the interrupted patting.  White Fang endured it, keeping his eyes fixed suspiciously, not upon the man that patted him, but upon the man that stood in the doorway.

“You may be a number one, tip-top minin’ expert, all right all right,” the dog-musher delivered himself oracularly, “but you missed the chance of your life when you was a boy an’ didn’t run off an’ join a circus.”

White Fang snarled at the sound of his voice, but this time did not leap away from under the hand that was caressing his head and the back of his neck with long, soothing strokes.

It was the beginning of the end for White Fang—the ending of the old life and the reign of hate.  A new and incomprehensibly fairer life was dawning.  It required much thinking and endless patience on the part of Weedon Scott to accomplish this.  And on the part of White Fang it required nothing less than a revolution.  He had to ignore the urges and promptings of instinct and reason, defy experience, give the lie to life itself.

Life, as he had known it, not only had had no place in it for much that he now did; but all the currents had gone counter to those to which he now abandoned himself.  In short, when all things were considered, he had to achieve an orientation far vaster than the one he had achieved at the time he came voluntarily in from the Wild and accepted Grey Beaver as his lord.  At that time he was a mere puppy, soft from the making, without form, ready for the thumb of circumstance to begin its work upon him.  But now it was different.  The thumb of circumstance had done its work only too well.  By it he had been formed and hardened into the Fighting Wolf, fierce and implacable, unloving and unlovable.  To accomplish the change was like a reflux of being, and this when the plasticity of youth was no longer his; when the fibre of him had become tough and knotty; when the warp and the woof of him had made of him an adamantine texture, harsh and unyielding; when the face of his spirit had become iron and all his instincts and axioms had crystallised into set rules, cautions, dislikes, and desires.

Yet again, in this new orientation, it was the thumb of circumstance that pressed and prodded him, softening that which had become hard and remoulding it into fairer form.  Weedon Scott was in truth this thumb.  He had gone to the roots of White Fang’s nature, and with kindness touched to life potencies that had languished and well-nigh perished.  One such potency was love.  It took the place of like, which latter had been the highest feeling that thrilled him in his intercourse with the gods.

But this love did not come in a day.  It began with like and out of it slowly developed.  White Fang did not run away, though he was allowed to remain loose, because he liked this new god.  This was certainly better than the life he had lived in the cage of Beauty Smith, and it was necessary that he should have some god.  The lordship of man was a need of his nature.  The seal of his dependence on man had been set upon him in that early day when he turned his back on the Wild and crawled to Grey Beaver’s feet to receive the expected beating.  This seal had been stamped upon him again, and ineradicably, on his second return from the Wild, when the long famine was over and there was fish once more in the village of Grey Beaver.

And so, because he needed a god and because he preferred Weedon Scott to Beauty Smith, White Fang remained.  In acknowledgment of fealty, he proceeded to take upon himself the guardianship of his master’s property.  He prowled about the cabin while the sled-dogs slept, and the first night-visitor to the cabin fought him off with a club until Weedon Scott came to the rescue.  But White Fang soon learned to differentiate between thieves and honest men, to appraise the true value of step and carriage.  The man who travelled, loud-stepping, the direct line to the cabin door, he let alone—though he watched him vigilantly until the door opened and he received the endorsement of the master.  But the man who went softly, by circuitous ways, peering with caution, seeking after secrecy—that was the man who received no suspension of judgment from White Fang, and who went away abruptly, hurriedly, and without dignity.

Weedon Scott had set himself the task of redeeming White Fang—or rather, of redeeming mankind from the wrong it had done White Fang.  It was a matter of principle and conscience.  He felt that the ill done White Fang was a debt incurred by man and that it must be paid.  So he went out of his way to be especially kind to the Fighting Wolf.  Each day he made it a point to caress and pet White Fang, and to do it at length.

At first suspicious and hostile, White Fang grew to like this petting.  But there was one thing that he never outgrew—his growling.  Growl he would, from the moment the petting began till it ended.  But it was a growl with a new note in it.  A stranger could not hear this note, and to such a stranger the growling of White Fang was an exhibition of primordial savagery, nerve-racking and blood-curdling.  But White Fang’s throat had become harsh-fibred from the making of ferocious sounds through the many years since his first little rasp of anger in the lair of his cubhood, and he could not soften the sounds of that throat now to express the gentleness he felt.  Nevertheless, Weedon Scott’s ear and sympathy were fine enough to catch the new note all but drowned in the fierceness—the note that was the faintest hint of a croon of content and that none but he could hear.

As the days went by, the evolution of like into love was accelerated.  White Fang himself began to grow aware of it, though in his consciousness he knew not what love was.  It manifested itself to him as a void in his being—a hungry, aching, yearning void that clamoured to be filled.  It was a pain and an unrest; and it received easement only by the touch of the new god’s presence.  At such times love was joy to him, a wild, keen-thrilling satisfaction.  But when away from his god, the pain and the unrest returned; the void in him sprang up and pressed against him with its emptiness, and the hunger gnawed and gnawed unceasingly.

White Fang was in the process of finding himself.  In spite of the maturity of his years and of the savage rigidity of the mould that had formed him, his nature was undergoing an expansion.  There was a burgeoning within him of strange feelings and unwonted impulses.  His old code of conduct was changing.  In the past he had liked comfort and surcease from pain, disliked discomfort and pain, and he had adjusted his actions accordingly.  But now it was different.  Because of this new feeling within him, he ofttimes elected discomfort and pain for the sake of his god.  Thus, in the early morning, instead of roaming and foraging, or lying in a sheltered nook, he would wait for hours on the cheerless cabin-stoop for a sight of the god’s face.  At night, when the god returned home, White Fang would leave the warm sleeping-place he had burrowed in the snow in order to receive the friendly snap of fingers and the word of greeting.  Meat, even meat itself, he would forego to be with his god, to receive a caress from him or to accompany him down into the town.

Like had been replaced by love.  And love was the plummet dropped down into the deeps of him where like had never gone.  And responsive out of his deeps had come the new thing—love.  That which was given unto him did he return.  This was a god indeed, a love-god, a warm and radiant god, in whose light White Fang’s nature expanded as a flower expands under the sun.

But White Fang was not demonstrative.  He was too old, too firmly moulded, to become adept at expressing himself in new ways.  He was too self-possessed, too strongly poised in his own isolation.  Too long had he cultivated reticence, aloofness, and moroseness.  He had never barked in his life, and he could not now learn to bark a welcome when his god approached.  He was never in the way, never extravagant nor foolish in the expression of his love.  He never ran to meet his god.  He waited at a distance; but he always waited, was always there.  His love partook of the nature of worship, dumb, inarticulate, a silent adoration.  Only by the steady regard of his eyes did he express his love, and by the unceasing following with his eyes of his god’s every movement.  Also, at times, when his god looked at him and spoke to him, he betrayed an awkward self-consciousness, caused by the struggle of his love to express itself and his physical inability to express it.

He learned to adjust himself in many ways to his new mode of life.  It was borne in upon him that he must let his master’s dogs alone.  Yet his dominant nature asserted itself, and he had first to thrash them into an acknowledgment of his superiority and leadership.  This accomplished, he had little trouble with them.  They gave trail to him when he came and went or walked among them, and when he asserted his will they obeyed.

In the same way, he came to tolerate Matt—as a possession of his master.  His master rarely fed him.  Matt did that, it was his business; yet White Fang divined that it was his master’s food he ate and that it was his master who thus fed him vicariously.  Matt it was who tried to put him into the harness and make him haul sled with the other dogs.  But Matt failed.  It was not until Weedon Scott put the harness on White Fang and worked him, that he understood.  He took it as his master’s will that Matt should drive him and work him just as he drove and worked his master’s other dogs.

Different from the Mackenzie toboggans were the Klondike sleds with runners under them.  And different was the method of driving the dogs.  There was no fan-formation of the team.  The dogs worked in single file, one behind another, hauling on double traces.  And here, in the Klondike, the leader was indeed the leader.  The wisest as well as strongest dog was the leader, and the team obeyed him and feared him.  That White Fang should quickly gain this post was inevitable.  He could not be satisfied with less, as Matt learned after much inconvenience and trouble.  White Fang picked out the post for himself, and Matt backed his judgment with strong language after the experiment had been tried.  But, though he worked in the sled in the day, White Fang did not forego the guarding of his master’s property in the night.  Thus he was on duty all the time, ever vigilant and faithful, the most valuable of all the dogs.

“Makin’ free to spit out what’s in me,” Matt said one day, “I beg to state that you was a wise guy all right when you paid the price you did for that dog.  You clean swindled Beauty Smith on top of pushin’ his face in with your fist.”

A recrudescence of anger glinted in Weedon Scott’s grey eyes, and he muttered savagely, “The beast!”

In the late spring a great trouble came to White Fang.  Without warning, the love-master disappeared.  There had been warning, but White Fang was unversed in such things and did not understand the packing of a grip.  He remembered afterwards that his packing had preceded the master’s disappearance; but at the time he suspected nothing.  That night he waited for the master to return.  At midnight the chill wind that blew drove him to shelter at the rear of the cabin.  There he drowsed, only half asleep, his ears keyed for the first sound of the familiar step.  But, at two in the morning, his anxiety drove him out to the cold front stoop, where he crouched, and waited.

But no master came.  In the morning the door opened and Matt stepped outside.  White Fang gazed at him wistfully.  There was no common speech by which he might learn what he wanted to know.  The days came and went, but never the master.  White Fang, who had never known sickness in his life, became sick.  He became very sick, so sick that Matt was finally compelled to bring him inside the cabin.  Also, in writing to his employer, Matt devoted a postscript to White Fang.

Weedon Scott reading the letter down in Circle City, came upon the following:

“That dam wolf won’t work.  Won’t eat.  Aint got no spunk left.  All the dogs is licking him.  Wants to know what has become of you, and I don’t know how to tell him.  Mebbe he is going to die.”

It was as Matt had said.  White Fang had ceased eating, lost heart, and allowed every dog of the team to thrash him.  In the cabin he lay on the floor near the stove, without interest in food, in Matt, nor in life.  Matt might talk gently to him or swear at him, it was all the same; he never did more than turn his dull eyes upon the man, then drop his head back to its customary position on his fore-paws.

And then, one night, Matt, reading to himself with moving lips and mumbled sounds, was startled by a low whine from White Fang.  He had got upon his feet, his ears cocked towards the door, and he was listening intently.  A moment later, Matt heard a footstep.  The door opened, and Weedon Scott stepped in.  The two men shook hands.  Then Scott looked around the room.

“Where’s the wolf?” he asked.

Then he discovered him, standing where he had been lying, near to the stove.  He had not rushed forward after the manner of other dogs.  He stood, watching and waiting.

“Holy smoke!” Matt exclaimed.  “Look at ’m wag his tail!”

Weedon Scott strode half across the room toward him, at the same time calling him.  White Fang came to him, not with a great bound, yet quickly.  He was awakened from self-consciousness, but as he drew near, his eyes took on a strange expression.  Something, an incommunicable vastness of feeling, rose up into his eyes as a light and shone forth.

“He never looked at me that way all the time you was gone!” Matt commented.

Weedon Scott did not hear.  He was squatting down on his heels, face to face with White Fang and petting him—rubbing at the roots of the ears, making long caressing strokes down the neck to the shoulders, tapping the spine gently with the balls of his fingers.  And White Fang was growling responsively, the crooning note of the growl more pronounced than ever.

But that was not all.  What of his joy, the great love in him, ever surging and struggling to express itself, succeeded in finding a new mode of expression.  He suddenly thrust his head forward and nudged his way in between the master’s arm and body.  And here, confined, hidden from view all except his ears, no longer growling, he continued to nudge and snuggle.

The two men looked at each other.  Scott’s eyes were shining.

“Gosh!” said Matt in an awe-stricken voice.

A moment later, when he had recovered himself, he said, “I always insisted that wolf was a dog.  Look at ’m!”

With the return of the love-master, White Fang’s recovery was rapid.  Two nights and a day he spent in the cabin.  Then he sallied forth.  The sled-dogs had forgotten his prowess.  They remembered only the latest, which was his weakness and sickness.  At the sight of him as he came out of the cabin, they sprang upon him.

“Talk about your rough-houses,” Matt murmured gleefully, standing in the doorway and looking on.

“Give ’m hell, you wolf!  Give ’m hell!—an’ then some!”

White Fang did not need the encouragement.  The return of the love-master was enough.  Life was flowing through him again, splendid and indomitable.  He fought from sheer joy, finding in it an expression of much that he felt and that otherwise was without speech.  There could be but one ending.  The team dispersed in ignominious defeat, and it was not until after dark that the dogs came sneaking back, one by one, by meekness and humility signifying their fealty to White Fang.

Having learned to snuggle, White Fang was guilty of it often.  It was the final word.  He could not go beyond it.  The one thing of which he had always been particularly jealous was his head.  He had always disliked to have it touched.  It was the Wild in him, the fear of hurt and of the trap, that had given rise to the panicky impulses to avoid contacts.  It was the mandate of his instinct that that head must be free.  And now, with the love-master, his snuggling was the deliberate act of putting himself into a position of hopeless helplessness.  It was an expression of perfect confidence, of absolute self-surrender, as though he said: “I put myself into thy hands.  Work thou thy will with me.”

One night, not long after the return, Scott and Matt sat at a game of cribbage preliminary to going to bed.  “Fifteen-two, fifteen-four an’ a pair makes six,” Mat was pegging up, when there was an outcry and sound of snarling without.  They looked at each other as they started to rise to their feet.

“The wolf’s nailed somebody,” Matt said.

A wild scream of fear and anguish hastened them.

“Bring a light!” Scott shouted, as he sprang outside.

Matt followed with the lamp, and by its light they saw a man lying on his back in the snow.  His arms were folded, one above the other, across his face and throat.  Thus he was trying to shield himself from White Fang’s teeth.  And there was need for it.  White Fang was in a rage, wickedly making his attack on the most vulnerable spot.  From shoulder to wrist of the crossed arms, the coat-sleeve, blue flannel shirt and undershirt were ripped in rags, while the arms themselves were terribly slashed and streaming blood.

All this the two men saw in the first instant.  The next instant Weedon Scott had White Fang by the throat and was dragging him clear.  White Fang struggled and snarled, but made no attempt to bite, while he quickly quieted down at a sharp word from the master.

Matt helped the man to his feet.  As he arose he lowered his crossed arms, exposing the bestial face of Beauty Smith.  The dog-musher let go of him precipitately, with action similar to that of a man who has picked up live fire.  Beauty Smith blinked in the lamplight and looked about him.  He caught sight of White Fang and terror rushed into his face.

At the same moment Matt noticed two objects lying in the snow.  He held the lamp close to them, indicating them with his toe for his employer’s benefit—a steel dog-chain and a stout club.

Weedon Scott saw and nodded.  Not a word was spoken.  The dog-musher laid his hand on Beauty Smith’s shoulder and faced him to the right about.  No word needed to be spoken.  Beauty Smith started.

In the meantime the love-master was patting White Fang and talking to him.

“Tried to steal you, eh?  And you wouldn’t have it!  Well, well, he made a mistake, didn’t he?”

“Must ‘a’ thought he had hold of seventeen devils,” the dog-musher sniggered.

White Fang, still wrought up and bristling, growled and growled, the hair slowly lying down, the crooning note remote and dim, but growing in his throat.
PART V
CHAPTER I—THE LONG TRAIL

It was in the air.  White Fang sensed the coming calamity, even before there was tangible evidence of it.  In vague ways it was borne in upon him that a change was impending.  He knew not how nor why, yet he got his feel of the oncoming event from the gods themselves.  In ways subtler than they knew, they betrayed their intentions to the wolf-dog that haunted the cabin-stoop, and that, though he never came inside the cabin, knew what went on inside their brains.

“Listen to that, will you!” the dog-musher exclaimed at supper one night.

Weedon Scott listened.  Through the door came a low, anxious whine, like a sobbing under the breath that had just grown audible.  Then came the long sniff, as White Fang reassured himself that his god was still inside and had not yet taken himself off in mysterious and solitary flight.

“I do believe that wolf’s on to you,” the dog-musher said.

Weedon Scott looked across at his companion with eyes that almost pleaded, though this was given the lie by his words.

“What the devil can I do with a wolf in California?” he demanded.

“That’s what I say,” Matt answered.  “What the devil can you do with a wolf in California?”

But this did not satisfy Weedon Scott.  The other seemed to be judging him in a non-committal sort of way.

“White man’s dogs would have no show against him,” Scott went on.  “He’d kill them on sight.  If he didn’t bankrupt me with damaged suits, the authorities would take him away from me and electrocute him.”

“He’s a downright murderer, I know,” was the dog-musher’s comment.

Weedon Scott looked at him suspiciously.

“It would never do,” he said decisively.

“It would never do!” Matt concurred.  “Why you’d have to hire a man ’specially to take care of ’m.”

The other suspicion was allayed.  He nodded cheerfully.  In the silence that followed, the low, half-sobbing whine was heard at the door and then the long, questing sniff.

“There’s no denyin’ he thinks a hell of a lot of you,” Matt said.

The other glared at him in sudden wrath.  “Damn it all, man!  I know my own mind and what’s best!”

“I’m agreein’ with you, only . . . ”

“Only what?” Scott snapped out.

“Only . . . ” the dog-musher began softly, then changed his mind and betrayed a rising anger of his own.  “Well, you needn’t get so all-fired het up about it.  Judgin’ by your actions one’d think you didn’t know your own mind.”

Weedon Scott debated with himself for a while, and then said more gently: “You are right, Matt.  I don’t know my own mind, and that’s what’s the trouble.”

“Why, it would be rank ridiculousness for me to take that dog along,” he broke out after another pause.

“I’m agreein’ with you,” was Matt’s answer, and again his employer was not quite satisfied with him.

“But how in the name of the great Sardanapolis he knows you’re goin’ is what gets me,” the dog-musher continued innocently.

“It’s beyond me, Matt,” Scott answered, with a mournful shake of the head.

Then came the day when, through the open cabin door, White Fang saw the fatal grip on the floor and the love-master packing things into it.  Also, there were comings and goings, and the erstwhile placid atmosphere of the cabin was vexed with strange perturbations and unrest.  Here was indubitable evidence.  White Fang had already scented it.  He now reasoned it.  His god was preparing for another flight.  And since he had not taken him with him before, so, now, he could look to be left behind.

That night he lifted the long wolf-howl.  As he had howled, in his puppy days, when he fled back from the Wild to the village to find it vanished and naught but a rubbish-heap to mark the site of Grey Beaver’s tepee, so now he pointed his muzzle to the cold stars and told to them his woe.

Inside the cabin the two men had just gone to bed.

“He’s gone off his food again,” Matt remarked from his bunk.

There was a grunt from Weedon Scott’s bunk, and a stir of blankets.

“From the way he cut up the other time you went away, I wouldn’t wonder this time but what he died.”

The blankets in the other bunk stirred irritably.

“Oh, shut up!” Scott cried out through the darkness.  “You nag worse than a woman.”

“I’m agreein’ with you,” the dog-musher answered, and Weedon Scott was not quite sure whether or not the other had snickered.

The next day White Fang’s anxiety and restlessness were even more pronounced.  He dogged his master’s heels whenever he left the cabin, and haunted the front stoop when he remained inside.  Through the open door he could catch glimpses of the luggage on the floor.  The grip had been joined by two large canvas bags and a box.  Matt was rolling the master’s blankets and fur robe inside a small tarpaulin.  White Fang whined as he watched the operation.

Later on two Indians arrived.  He watched them closely as they shouldered the luggage and were led off down the hill by Matt, who carried the bedding and the grip.  But White Fang did not follow them.  The master was still in the cabin.  After a time, Matt returned.  The master came to the door and called White Fang inside.

“You poor devil,” he said gently, rubbing White Fang’s ears and tapping his spine.  “I’m hitting the long trail, old man, where you cannot follow.  Now give me a growl—the last, good, good-bye growl.”

But White Fang refused to growl.  Instead, and after a wistful, searching look, he snuggled in, burrowing his head out of sight between the master’s arm and body.

“There she blows!” Matt cried.  From the Yukon arose the hoarse bellowing of a river steamboat.  “You’ve got to cut it short.  Be sure and lock the front door.  I’ll go out the back.  Get a move on!”

The two doors slammed at the same moment, and Weedon Scott waited for Matt to come around to the front.  From inside the door came a low whining and sobbing.  Then there were long, deep-drawn sniffs.

“You must take good care of him, Matt,” Scott said, as they started down the hill.  “Write and let me know how he gets along.”

“Sure,” the dog-musher answered.  “But listen to that, will you!”

Both men stopped.  White Fang was howling as dogs howl when their masters lie dead.  He was voicing an utter woe, his cry bursting upward in great heart-breaking rushes, dying down into quavering misery, and bursting upward again with a rush upon rush of grief.

The Aurora was the first steamboat of the year for the Outside, and her decks were jammed with prosperous adventurers and broken gold seekers, all equally as mad to get to the Outside as they had been originally to get to the Inside.  Near the gang-plank, Scott was shaking hands with Matt, who was preparing to go ashore.  But Matt’s hand went limp in the other’s grasp as his gaze shot past and remained fixed on something behind him.  Scott turned to see.  Sitting on the deck several feet away and watching wistfully was White Fang.

The dog-musher swore softly, in awe-stricken accents.  Scott could only look in wonder.

“Did you lock the front door?” Matt demanded.  The other nodded, and asked, “How about the back?”

“You just bet I did,” was the fervent reply.

White Fang flattened his ears ingratiatingly, but remained where he was, making no attempt to approach.

“I’ll have to take ’m ashore with me.”

Matt made a couple of steps toward White Fang, but the latter slid away from him.  The dog-musher made a rush of it, and White Fang dodged between the legs of a group of men.  Ducking, turning, doubling, he slid about the deck, eluding the other’s efforts to capture him.

But when the love-master spoke, White Fang came to him with prompt obedience.

“Won’t come to the hand that’s fed ’m all these months,” the dog-musher muttered resentfully.  “And you—you ain’t never fed ’m after them first days of gettin’ acquainted.  I’m blamed if I can see how he works it out that you’re the boss.”

Scott, who had been patting White Fang, suddenly bent closer and pointed out fresh-made cuts on his muzzle, and a gash between the eyes.

Matt bent over and passed his hand along White Fang’s belly.

“We plump forgot the window.  He’s all cut an’ gouged underneath.  Must ‘a’ butted clean through it, b’gosh!”

But Weedon Scott was not listening.  He was thinking rapidly.  The Aurora’s whistle hooted a final announcement of departure.  Men were scurrying down the gang-plank to the shore.  Matt loosened the bandana from his own neck and started to put it around White Fang’s.  Scott grasped the dog-musher’s hand.

“Good-bye, Matt, old man.  About the wolf—you needn’t write.  You see, I’ve . . . !”

“What!” the dog-musher exploded.  “You don’t mean to say . . .?”

“The very thing I mean.  Here’s your bandana.  I’ll write to you about him.”

Matt paused halfway down the gang-plank.

“He’ll never stand the climate!” he shouted back.  “Unless you clip ’m in warm weather!”

The gang-plank was hauled in, and the Aurora swung out from the bank.  Weedon Scott waved a last good-bye.  Then he turned and bent over White Fang, standing by his side.

“Now growl, damn you, growl,” he said, as he patted the responsive head and rubbed the flattening ears.
CHAPTER II—THE SOUTHLAND

White Fang landed from the steamer in San Francisco.  He was appalled.  Deep in him, below any reasoning process or act of consciousness, he had associated power with godhead.  And never had the white men seemed such marvellous gods as now, when he trod the slimy pavement of San Francisco.  The log cabins he had known were replaced by towering buildings.  The streets were crowded with perils—waggons, carts, automobiles; great, straining horses pulling huge trucks; and monstrous cable and electric cars hooting and clanging through the midst, screeching their insistent menace after the manner of the lynxes he had known in the northern woods.

All this was the manifestation of power.  Through it all, behind it all, was man, governing and controlling, expressing himself, as of old, by his mastery over matter.  It was colossal, stunning.  White Fang was awed.  Fear sat upon him.  As in his cubhood he had been made to feel his smallness and puniness on the day he first came in from the Wild to the village of Grey Beaver, so now, in his full-grown stature and pride of strength, he was made to feel small and puny.  And there were so many gods!  He was made dizzy by the swarming of them.  The thunder of the streets smote upon his ears.  He was bewildered by the tremendous and endless rush and movement of things.  As never before, he felt his dependence on the love-master, close at whose heels he followed, no matter what happened never losing sight of him.

But White Fang was to have no more than a nightmare vision of the city—an experience that was like a bad dream, unreal and terrible, that haunted him for long after in his dreams.  He was put into a baggage-car by the master, chained in a corner in the midst of heaped trunks and valises.  Here a squat and brawny god held sway, with much noise, hurling trunks and boxes about, dragging them in through the door and tossing them into the piles, or flinging them out of the door, smashing and crashing, to other gods who awaited them.

And here, in this inferno of luggage, was White Fang deserted by the master.  Or at least White Fang thought he was deserted, until he smelled out the master’s canvas clothes-bags alongside of him, and proceeded to mount guard over them.

“’Bout time you come,” growled the god of the car, an hour later, when Weedon Scott appeared at the door.  “That dog of yourn won’t let me lay a finger on your stuff.”

White Fang emerged from the car.  He was astonished.  The nightmare city was gone.  The car had been to him no more than a room in a house, and when he had entered it the city had been all around him.  In the interval the city had disappeared.  The roar of it no longer dinned upon his ears.  Before him was smiling country, streaming with sunshine, lazy with quietude.  But he had little time to marvel at the transformation.  He accepted it as he accepted all the unaccountable doings and manifestations of the gods.  It was their way.

There was a carriage waiting.  A man and a woman approached the master.  The woman’s arms went out and clutched the master around the neck—a hostile act!  The next moment Weedon Scott had torn loose from the embrace and closed with White Fang, who had become a snarling, raging demon.

“It’s all right, mother,” Scott was saying as he kept tight hold of White Fang and placated him.  “He thought you were going to injure me, and he wouldn’t stand for it.  It’s all right.  It’s all right.  He’ll learn soon enough.”

“And in the meantime I may be permitted to love my son when his dog is not around,” she laughed, though she was pale and weak from the fright.

She looked at White Fang, who snarled and bristled and glared malevolently.

“He’ll have to learn, and he shall, without postponement,” Scott said.

He spoke softly to White Fang until he had quieted him, then his voice became firm.

“Down, sir!  Down with you!”

This had been one of the things taught him by the master, and White Fang obeyed, though he lay down reluctantly and sullenly.

“Now, mother.”

Scott opened his arms to her, but kept his eyes on White Fang.

“Down!” he warned.  “Down!”

White Fang, bristling silently, half-crouching as he rose, sank back and watched the hostile act repeated.  But no harm came of it, nor of the embrace from the strange man-god that followed.  Then the clothes-bags were taken into the carriage, the strange gods and the love-master followed, and White Fang pursued, now running vigilantly behind, now bristling up to the running horses and warning them that he was there to see that no harm befell the god they dragged so swiftly across the earth.

At the end of fifteen minutes, the carriage swung in through a stone gateway and on between a double row of arched and interlacing walnut trees.  On either side stretched lawns, their broad sweep broken here and there by great sturdy-limbed oaks.  In the near distance, in contrast with the young-green of the tended grass, sunburnt hay-fields showed tan and gold; while beyond were the tawny hills and upland pastures.  From the head of the lawn, on the first soft swell from the valley-level, looked down the deep-porched, many-windowed house.

Little opportunity was given White Fang to see all this.  Hardly had the carriage entered the grounds, when he was set upon by a sheep-dog, bright-eyed, sharp-muzzled, righteously indignant and angry.  It was between him and the master, cutting him off.  White Fang snarled no warning, but his hair bristled as he made his silent and deadly rush.  This rush was never completed.  He halted with awkward abruptness, with stiff fore-legs bracing himself against his momentum, almost sitting down on his haunches, so desirous was he of avoiding contact with the dog he was in the act of attacking.  It was a female, and the law of his kind thrust a barrier between.  For him to attack her would require nothing less than a violation of his instinct.

But with the sheep-dog it was otherwise.  Being a female, she possessed no such instinct.  On the other hand, being a sheep-dog, her instinctive fear of the Wild, and especially of the wolf, was unusually keen.  White Fang was to her a wolf, the hereditary marauder who had preyed upon her flocks from the time sheep were first herded and guarded by some dim ancestor of hers.  And so, as he abandoned his rush at her and braced himself to avoid the contact, she sprang upon him.  He snarled involuntarily as he felt her teeth in his shoulder, but beyond this made no offer to hurt her.  He backed away, stiff-legged with self-consciousness, and tried to go around her.  He dodged this way and that, and curved and turned, but to no purpose.  She remained always between him and the way he wanted to go.

“Here, Collie!” called the strange man in the carriage.

Weedon Scott laughed.

“Never mind, father.  It is good discipline.  White Fang will have to learn many things, and it’s just as well that he begins now.  He’ll adjust himself all right.”

The carriage drove on, and still Collie blocked White Fang’s way.  He tried to outrun her by leaving the drive and circling across the lawn but she ran on the inner and smaller circle, and was always there, facing him with her two rows of gleaming teeth.  Back he circled, across the drive to the other lawn, and again she headed him off.

The carriage was bearing the master away.  White Fang caught glimpses of it disappearing amongst the trees.  The situation was desperate.  He essayed another circle.  She followed, running swiftly.  And then, suddenly, he turned upon her.  It was his old fighting trick.  Shoulder to shoulder, he struck her squarely.  Not only was she overthrown.  So fast had she been running that she rolled along, now on her back, now on her side, as she struggled to stop, clawing gravel with her feet and crying shrilly her hurt pride and indignation.

White Fang did not wait.  The way was clear, and that was all he had wanted.  She took after him, never ceasing her outcry.  It was the straightaway now, and when it came to real running, White Fang could teach her things.  She ran frantically, hysterically, straining to the utmost, advertising the effort she was making with every leap: and all the time White Fang slid smoothly away from her silently, without effort, gliding like a ghost over the ground.

As he rounded the house to the porte-cochère, he came upon the carriage.  It had stopped, and the master was alighting.  At this moment, still running at top speed, White Fang became suddenly aware of an attack from the side.  It was a deer-hound rushing upon him.  White Fang tried to face it.  But he was going too fast, and the hound was too close.  It struck him on the side; and such was his forward momentum and the unexpectedness of it, White Fang was hurled to the ground and rolled clear over.  He came out of the tangle a spectacle of malignancy, ears flattened back, lips writhing, nose wrinkling, his teeth clipping together as the fangs barely missed the hound’s soft throat.

The master was running up, but was too far away; and it was Collie that saved the hound’s life.  Before White Fang could spring in and deliver the fatal stroke, and just as he was in the act of springing in, Collie arrived.  She had been out-manoeuvred and out-run, to say nothing of her having been unceremoniously tumbled in the gravel, and her arrival was like that of a tornado—made up of offended dignity, justifiable wrath, and instinctive hatred for this marauder from the Wild.  She struck White Fang at right angles in the midst of his spring, and again he was knocked off his feet and rolled over.

The next moment the master arrived, and with one hand held White Fang, while the father called off the dogs.

“I say, this is a pretty warm reception for a poor lone wolf from the Arctic,” the master said, while White Fang calmed down under his caressing hand.  “In all his life he’s only been known once to go off his feet, and here he’s been rolled twice in thirty seconds.”

The carriage had driven away, and other strange gods had appeared from out the house.  Some of these stood respectfully at a distance; but two of them, women, perpetrated the hostile act of clutching the master around the neck.  White Fang, however, was beginning to tolerate this act.  No harm seemed to come of it, while the noises the gods made were certainly not threatening.  These gods also made overtures to White Fang, but he warned them off with a snarl, and the master did likewise with word of mouth.  At such times White Fang leaned in close against the master’s legs and received reassuring pats on the head.

The hound, under the command, “Dick!  Lie down, sir!” had gone up the steps and lain down to one side of the porch, still growling and keeping a sullen watch on the intruder.  Collie had been taken in charge by one of the woman-gods, who held arms around her neck and petted and caressed her; but Collie was very much perplexed and worried, whining and restless, outraged by the permitted presence of this wolf and confident that the gods were making a mistake.

All the gods started up the steps to enter the house.  White Fang followed closely at the master’s heels.  Dick, on the porch, growled, and White Fang, on the steps, bristled and growled back.

“Take Collie inside and leave the two of them to fight it out,” suggested Scott’s father.  “After that they’ll be friends.”

“Then White Fang, to show his friendship, will have to be chief mourner at the funeral,” laughed the master.

The elder Scott looked incredulously, first at White Fang, then at Dick, and finally at his son.

“You mean . . .?”

Weedon nodded his head.  “I mean just that.  You’d have a dead Dick inside one minute—two minutes at the farthest.”

He turned to White Fang.  “Come on, you wolf.  It’s you that’ll have to come inside.”

White Fang walked stiff-legged up the steps and across the porch, with tail rigidly erect, keeping his eyes on Dick to guard against a flank attack, and at the same time prepared for whatever fierce manifestation of the unknown that might pounce out upon him from the interior of the house.  But no thing of fear pounced out, and when he had gained the inside he scouted carefully around, looking at it and finding it not.  Then he lay down with a contented grunt at the master’s feet, observing all that went on, ever ready to spring to his feet and fight for life with the terrors he felt must lurk under the trap-roof of the dwelling.
CHAPTER III—THE GOD’S DOMAIN

Not only was White Fang adaptable by nature, but he had travelled much, and knew the meaning and necessity of adjustment.  Here, in Sierra Vista, which was the name of Judge Scott’s place, White Fang quickly began to make himself at home.  He had no further serious trouble with the dogs.  They knew more about the ways of the Southland gods than did he, and in their eyes he had qualified when he accompanied the gods inside the house.  Wolf that he was, and unprecedented as it was, the gods had sanctioned his presence, and they, the dogs of the gods, could only recognise this sanction.

Dick, perforce, had to go through a few stiff formalities at first, after which he calmly accepted White Fang as an addition to the premises.  Had Dick had his way, they would have been good friends.  All but White Fang was averse to friendship.  All he asked of other dogs was to be let alone.  His whole life he had kept aloof from his kind, and he still desired to keep aloof.  Dick’s overtures bothered him, so he snarled Dick away.  In the north he had learned the lesson that he must let the master’s dogs alone, and he did not forget that lesson now.  But he insisted on his own privacy and self-seclusion, and so thoroughly ignored Dick that that good-natured creature finally gave him up and scarcely took as much interest in him as in the hitching-post near the stable.

Not so with Collie.  While she accepted him because it was the mandate of the gods, that was no reason that she should leave him in peace.  Woven into her being was the memory of countless crimes he and his had perpetrated against her ancestry.  Not in a day nor a generation were the ravaged sheepfolds to be forgotten.  All this was a spur to her, pricking her to retaliation.  She could not fly in the face of the gods who permitted him, but that did not prevent her from making life miserable for him in petty ways.  A feud, ages old, was between them, and she, for one, would see to it that he was reminded.

So Collie took advantage of her sex to pick upon White Fang and maltreat him.  His instinct would not permit him to attack her, while her persistence would not permit him to ignore her.  When she rushed at him he turned his fur-protected shoulder to her sharp teeth and walked away stiff-legged and stately.  When she forced him too hard, he was compelled to go about in a circle, his shoulder presented to her, his head turned from her, and on his face and in his eyes a patient and bored expression.  Sometimes, however, a nip on his hind-quarters hastened his retreat and made it anything but stately.  But as a rule he managed to maintain a dignity that was almost solemnity.  He ignored her existence whenever it was possible, and made it a point to keep out of her way.  When he saw or heard her coming, he got up and walked off.

There was much in other matters for White Fang to learn.  Life in the Northland was simplicity itself when compared with the complicated affairs of Sierra Vista.  First of all, he had to learn the family of the master.  In a way he was prepared to do this.  As Mit-sah and Kloo-kooch had belonged to Grey Beaver, sharing his food, his fire, and his blankets, so now, at Sierra Vista, belonged to the love-master all the denizens of the house.

But in this matter there was a difference, and many differences.  Sierra Vista was a far vaster affair than the tepee of Grey Beaver.  There were many persons to be considered.  There was Judge Scott, and there was his wife.  There were the master’s two sisters, Beth and Mary.  There was his wife, Alice, and then there were his children, Weedon and Maud, toddlers of four and six.  There was no way for anybody to tell him about all these people, and of blood-ties and relationship he knew nothing whatever and never would be capable of knowing.  Yet he quickly worked it out that all of them belonged to the master.  Then, by observation, whenever opportunity offered, by study of action, speech, and the very intonations of the voice, he slowly learned the intimacy and the degree of favour they enjoyed with the master.  And by this ascertained standard, White Fang treated them accordingly.  What was of value to the master he valued; what was dear to the master was to be cherished by White Fang and guarded carefully.

Thus it was with the two children.  All his life he had disliked children.  He hated and feared their hands.  The lessons were not tender that he had learned of their tyranny and cruelty in the days of the Indian villages.  When Weedon and Maud had first approached him, he growled warningly and looked malignant.  A cuff from the master and a sharp word had then compelled him to permit their caresses, though he growled and growled under their tiny hands, and in the growl there was no crooning note.  Later, he observed that the boy and girl were of great value in the master’s eyes.  Then it was that no cuff nor sharp word was necessary before they could pat him.

Yet White Fang was never effusively affectionate.  He yielded to the master’s children with an ill but honest grace, and endured their fooling as one would endure a painful operation.  When he could no longer endure, he would get up and stalk determinedly away from them.  But after a time, he grew even to like the children.  Still he was not demonstrative.  He would not go up to them.  On the other hand, instead of walking away at sight of them, he waited for them to come to him.  And still later, it was noticed that a pleased light came into his eyes when he saw them approaching, and that he looked after them with an appearance of curious regret when they left him for other amusements.

All this was a matter of development, and took time.  Next in his regard, after the children, was Judge Scott.  There were two reasons, possibly, for this.  First, he was evidently a valuable possession of the master’s, and next, he was undemonstrative.  White Fang liked to lie at his feet on the wide porch when he read the newspaper, from time to time favouring White Fang with a look or a word—untroublesome tokens that he recognised White Fang’s presence and existence.  But this was only when the master was not around.  When the master appeared, all other beings ceased to exist so far as White Fang was concerned.

White Fang allowed all the members of the family to pet him and make much of him; but he never gave to them what he gave to the master.  No caress of theirs could put the love-croon into his throat, and, try as they would, they could never persuade him into snuggling against them.  This expression of abandon and surrender, of absolute trust, he reserved for the master alone.  In fact, he never regarded the members of the family in any other light than possessions of the love-master.

Also White Fang had early come to differentiate between the family and the servants of the household.  The latter were afraid of him, while he merely refrained from attacking them.  This because he considered that they were likewise possessions of the master.  Between White Fang and them existed a neutrality and no more.  They cooked for the master and washed the dishes and did other things just as Matt had done up in the Klondike.  They were, in short, appurtenances of the household.

Outside the household there was even more for White Fang to learn.  The master’s domain was wide and complex, yet it had its metes and bounds.  The land itself ceased at the county road.  Outside was the common domain of all gods—the roads and streets.  Then inside other fences were the particular domains of other gods.  A myriad laws governed all these things and determined conduct; yet he did not know the speech of the gods, nor was there any way for him to learn save by experience.  He obeyed his natural impulses until they ran him counter to some law.  When this had been done a few times, he learned the law and after that observed it.

But most potent in his education was the cuff of the master’s hand, the censure of the master’s voice.  Because of White Fang’s very great love, a cuff from the master hurt him far more than any beating Grey Beaver or Beauty Smith had ever given him.  They had hurt only the flesh of him; beneath the flesh the spirit had still raged, splendid and invincible.  But with the master the cuff was always too light to hurt the flesh.  Yet it went deeper.  It was an expression of the master’s disapproval, and White Fang’s spirit wilted under it.

In point of fact, the cuff was rarely administered.  The master’s voice was sufficient.  By it White Fang knew whether he did right or not.  By it he trimmed his conduct and adjusted his actions.  It was the compass by which he steered and learned to chart the manners of a new land and life.

In the Northland, the only domesticated animal was the dog.  All other animals lived in the Wild, and were, when not too formidable, lawful spoil for any dog.  All his days White Fang had foraged among the live things for food.  It did not enter his head that in the Southland it was otherwise.  But this he was to learn early in his residence in Santa Clara Valley.  Sauntering around the corner of the house in the early morning, he came upon a chicken that had escaped from the chicken-yard.  White Fang’s natural impulse was to eat it.  A couple of bounds, a flash of teeth and a frightened squawk, and he had scooped in the adventurous fowl.  It was farm-bred and fat and tender; and White Fang licked his chops and decided that such fare was good.

Later in the day, he chanced upon another stray chicken near the stables.  One of the grooms ran to the rescue.  He did not know White Fang’s breed, so for weapon he took a light buggy-whip.  At the first cut of the whip, White Fang left the chicken for the man.  A club might have stopped White Fang, but not a whip.  Silently, without flinching, he took a second cut in his forward rush, and as he leaped for the throat the groom cried out, “My God!” and staggered backward.  He dropped the whip and shielded his throat with his arms.  In consequence, his forearm was ripped open to the bone.

The man was badly frightened.  It was not so much White Fang’s ferocity as it was his silence that unnerved the groom.  Still protecting his throat and face with his torn and bleeding arm, he tried to retreat to the barn.  And it would have gone hard with him had not Collie appeared on the scene.  As she had saved Dick’s life, she now saved the groom’s.  She rushed upon White Fang in frenzied wrath.  She had been right.  She had known better than the blundering gods.  All her suspicions were justified.  Here was the ancient marauder up to his old tricks again.

The groom escaped into the stables, and White Fang backed away before Collie’s wicked teeth, or presented his shoulder to them and circled round and round.  But Collie did not give over, as was her wont, after a decent interval of chastisement.  On the contrary, she grew more excited and angry every moment, until, in the end, White Fang flung dignity to the winds and frankly fled away from her across the fields.

“He’ll learn to leave chickens alone,” the master said.  “But I can’t give him the lesson until I catch him in the act.”

Two nights later came the act, but on a more generous scale than the master had anticipated.  White Fang had observed closely the chicken-yards and the habits of the chickens.  In the night-time, after they had gone to roost, he climbed to the top of a pile of newly hauled lumber.  From there he gained the roof of a chicken-house, passed over the ridgepole and dropped to the ground inside.  A moment later he was inside the house, and the slaughter began.

In the morning, when the master came out on to the porch, fifty white Leghorn hens, laid out in a row by the groom, greeted his eyes.  He whistled to himself, softly, first with surprise, and then, at the end, with admiration.  His eyes were likewise greeted by White Fang, but about the latter there were no signs of shame nor guilt.  He carried himself with pride, as though, forsooth, he had achieved a deed praiseworthy and meritorious.  There was about him no consciousness of sin.  The master’s lips tightened as he faced the disagreeable task.  Then he talked harshly to the unwitting culprit, and in his voice there was nothing but godlike wrath.  Also, he held White Fang’s nose down to the slain hens, and at the same time cuffed him soundly.

White Fang never raided a chicken-roost again.  It was against the law, and he had learned it.  Then the master took him into the chicken-yards.  White Fang’s natural impulse, when he saw the live food fluttering about him and under his very nose, was to spring upon it.  He obeyed the impulse, but was checked by the master’s voice.  They continued in the yards for half an hour.  Time and again the impulse surged over White Fang, and each time, as he yielded to it, he was checked by the master’s voice.  Thus it was he learned the law, and ere he left the domain of the chickens, he had learned to ignore their existence.

“You can never cure a chicken-killer.”  Judge Scott shook his head sadly at luncheon table, when his son narrated the lesson he had given White Fang.  “Once they’ve got the habit and the taste of blood . . .”  Again he shook his head sadly.

But Weedon Scott did not agree with his father.  “I’ll tell you what I’ll do,” he challenged finally.  “I’ll lock White Fang in with the chickens all afternoon.”

“But think of the chickens,” objected the judge.

“And furthermore,” the son went on, “for every chicken he kills, I’ll pay you one dollar gold coin of the realm.”

“But you should penalise father, too,” interpose Beth.

Her sister seconded her, and a chorus of approval arose from around the table.  Judge Scott nodded his head in agreement.

“All right.” Weedon Scott pondered for a moment.  “And if, at the end of the afternoon White Fang hasn’t harmed a chicken, for every ten minutes of the time he has spent in the yard, you will have to say to him, gravely and with deliberation, just as if you were sitting on the bench and solemnly passing judgment, ‘White Fang, you are smarter than I thought.’”

From hidden points of vantage the family watched the performance.  But it was a fizzle.  Locked in the yard and there deserted by the master, White Fang lay down and went to sleep.  Once he got up and walked over to the trough for a drink of water.  The chickens he calmly ignored.  So far as he was concerned they did not exist.  At four o’clock he executed a running jump, gained the roof of the chicken-house and leaped to the ground outside, whence he sauntered gravely to the house.  He had learned the law.  And on the porch, before the delighted family, Judge Scott, face to face with White Fang, said slowly and solemnly, sixteen times, “White Fang, you are smarter than I thought.”

But it was the multiplicity of laws that befuddled White Fang and often brought him into disgrace.  He had to learn that he must not touch the chickens that belonged to other gods.  Then there were cats, and rabbits, and turkeys; all these he must let alone.  In fact, when he had but partly learned the law, his impression was that he must leave all live things alone.  Out in the back-pasture, a quail could flutter up under his nose unharmed.  All tense and trembling with eagerness and desire, he mastered his instinct and stood still.  He was obeying the will of the gods.

And then, one day, again out in the back-pasture, he saw Dick start a jackrabbit and run it.  The master himself was looking on and did not interfere.  Nay, he encouraged White Fang to join in the chase.  And thus he learned that there was no taboo on jackrabbits.  In the end he worked out the complete law.  Between him and all domestic animals there must be no hostilities.  If not amity, at least neutrality must obtain.  But the other animals—the squirrels, and quail, and cottontails, were creatures of the Wild who had never yielded allegiance to man.  They were the lawful prey of any dog.  It was only the tame that the gods protected, and between the tame deadly strife was not permitted.  The gods held the power of life and death over their subjects, and the gods were jealous of their power.

Life was complex in the Santa Clara Valley after the simplicities of the Northland.  And the chief thing demanded by these intricacies of civilisation was control, restraint—a poise of self that was as delicate as the fluttering of gossamer wings and at the same time as rigid as steel.  Life had a thousand faces, and White Fang found he must meet them all—thus, when he went to town, in to San Jose, running behind the carriage or loafing about the streets when the carriage stopped.  Life flowed past him, deep and wide and varied, continually impinging upon his senses, demanding of him instant and endless adjustments and correspondences, and compelling him, almost always, to suppress his natural impulses.

There were butcher-shops where meat hung within reach.  This meat he must not touch.  There were cats at the houses the master visited that must be let alone.  And there were dogs everywhere that snarled at him and that he must not attack.  And then, on the crowded sidewalks there were persons innumerable whose attention he attracted.  They would stop and look at him, point him out to one another, examine him, talk of him, and, worst of all, pat him.  And these perilous contacts from all these strange hands he must endure.  Yet this endurance he achieved.  Furthermore, he got over being awkward and self-conscious.  In a lofty way he received the attentions of the multitudes of strange gods.  With condescension he accepted their condescension.  On the other hand, there was something about him that prevented great familiarity.  They patted him on the head and passed on, contented and pleased with their own daring.

But it was not all easy for White Fang.  Running behind the carriage in the outskirts of San Jose, he encountered certain small boys who made a practice of flinging stones at him.  Yet he knew that it was not permitted him to pursue and drag them down.  Here he was compelled to violate his instinct of self-preservation, and violate it he did, for he was becoming tame and qualifying himself for civilisation.

Nevertheless, White Fang was not quite satisfied with the arrangement.  He had no abstract ideas about justice and fair play.  But there is a certain sense of equity that resides in life, and it was this sense in him that resented the unfairness of his being permitted no defence against the stone-throwers.  He forgot that in the covenant entered into between him and the gods they were pledged to care for him and defend him.  But one day the master sprang from the carriage, whip in hand, and gave the stone-throwers a thrashing.  After that they threw stones no more, and White Fang understood and was satisfied.

One other experience of similar nature was his.  On the way to town, hanging around the saloon at the cross-roads, were three dogs that made a practice of rushing out upon him when he went by.  Knowing his deadly method of fighting, the master had never ceased impressing upon White Fang the law that he must not fight.  As a result, having learned the lesson well, White Fang was hard put whenever he passed the cross-roads saloon.  After the first rush, each time, his snarl kept the three dogs at a distance but they trailed along behind, yelping and bickering and insulting him.  This endured for some time.  The men at the saloon even urged the dogs on to attack White Fang.  One day they openly sicked the dogs on him.  The master stopped the carriage.

“Go to it,” he said to White Fang.

But White Fang could not believe.  He looked at the master, and he looked at the dogs.  Then he looked back eagerly and questioningly at the master.

The master nodded his head.  “Go to them, old fellow.  Eat them up.”

White Fang no longer hesitated.  He turned and leaped silently among his enemies.  All three faced him.  There was a great snarling and growling, a clashing of teeth and a flurry of bodies.  The dust of the road arose in a cloud and screened the battle.  But at the end of several minutes two dogs were struggling in the dirt and the third was in full flight.  He leaped a ditch, went through a rail fence, and fled across a field.  White Fang followed, sliding over the ground in wolf fashion and with wolf speed, swiftly and without noise, and in the centre of the field he dragged down and slew the dog.

With this triple killing his main troubles with dogs ceased.  The word went up and down the valley, and men saw to it that their dogs did not molest the Fighting Wolf.
CHAPTER IV—THE CALL OF KIND

The months came and went.  There was plenty of food and no work in the Southland, and White Fang lived fat and prosperous and happy.  Not alone was he in the geographical Southland, for he was in the Southland of life.  Human kindness was like a sun shining upon him, and he flourished like a flower planted in good soil.

And yet he remained somehow different from other dogs.  He knew the law even better than did the dogs that had known no other life, and he observed the law more punctiliously; but still there was about him a suggestion of lurking ferocity, as though the Wild still lingered in him and the wolf in him merely slept.

He never chummed with other dogs.  Lonely he had lived, so far as his kind was concerned, and lonely he would continue to live.  In his puppyhood, under the persecution of Lip-lip and the puppy-pack, and in his fighting days with Beauty Smith, he had acquired a fixed aversion for dogs.  The natural course of his life had been diverted, and, recoiling from his kind, he had clung to the human.

Besides, all Southland dogs looked upon him with suspicion.  He aroused in them their instinctive fear of the Wild, and they greeted him always with snarl and growl and belligerent hatred.  He, on the other hand, learned that it was not necessary to use his teeth upon them.  His naked fangs and writhing lips were uniformly efficacious, rarely failing to send a bellowing on-rushing dog back on its haunches.

But there was one trial in White Fang’s life—Collie.  She never gave him a moment’s peace.  She was not so amenable to the law as he.  She defied all efforts of the master to make her become friends with White Fang.  Ever in his ears was sounding her sharp and nervous snarl.  She had never forgiven him the chicken-killing episode, and persistently held to the belief that his intentions were bad.  She found him guilty before the act, and treated him accordingly.  She became a pest to him, like a policeman following him around the stable and the hounds, and, if he even so much as glanced curiously at a pigeon or chicken, bursting into an outcry of indignation and wrath.  His favourite way of ignoring her was to lie down, with his head on his fore-paws, and pretend sleep.  This always dumfounded and silenced her.

With the exception of Collie, all things went well with White Fang.  He had learned control and poise, and he knew the law.  He achieved a staidness, and calmness, and philosophic tolerance.  He no longer lived in a hostile environment.  Danger and hurt and death did not lurk everywhere about him.  In time, the unknown, as a thing of terror and menace ever impending, faded away.  Life was soft and easy.  It flowed along smoothly, and neither fear nor foe lurked by the way.

He missed the snow without being aware of it.  “An unduly long summer,” would have been his thought had he thought about it; as it was, he merely missed the snow in a vague, subconscious way.  In the same fashion, especially in the heat of summer when he suffered from the sun, he experienced faint longings for the Northland.  Their only effect upon him, however, was to make him uneasy and restless without his knowing what was the matter.

White Fang had never been very demonstrative.  Beyond his snuggling and the throwing of a crooning note into his love-growl, he had no way of expressing his love.  Yet it was given him to discover a third way.  He had always been susceptible to the laughter of the gods.  Laughter had affected him with madness, made him frantic with rage.  But he did not have it in him to be angry with the love-master, and when that god elected to laugh at him in a good-natured, bantering way, he was nonplussed.  He could feel the pricking and stinging of the old anger as it strove to rise up in him, but it strove against love.  He could not be angry; yet he had to do something.  At first he was dignified, and the master laughed the harder.  Then he tried to be more dignified, and the master laughed harder than before.  In the end, the master laughed him out of his dignity.  His jaws slightly parted, his lips lifted a little, and a quizzical expression that was more love than humour came into his eyes.  He had learned to laugh.

Likewise he learned to romp with the master, to be tumbled down and rolled over, and be the victim of innumerable rough tricks.  In return he feigned anger, bristling and growling ferociously, and clipping his teeth together in snaps that had all the seeming of deadly intention.  But he never forgot himself.  Those snaps were always delivered on the empty air.  At the end of such a romp, when blow and cuff and snap and snarl were fast and furious, they would break off suddenly and stand several feet apart, glaring at each other.  And then, just as suddenly, like the sun rising on a stormy sea, they would begin to laugh.  This would always culminate with the master’s arms going around White Fang’s neck and shoulders while the latter crooned and growled his love-song.

But nobody else ever romped with White Fang.  He did not permit it.  He stood on his dignity, and when they attempted it, his warning snarl and bristling mane were anything but playful.  That he allowed the master these liberties was no reason that he should be a common dog, loving here and loving there, everybody’s property for a romp and good time.  He loved with single heart and refused to cheapen himself or his love.

The master went out on horseback a great deal, and to accompany him was one of White Fang’s chief duties in life.  In the Northland he had evidenced his fealty by toiling in the harness; but there were no sleds in the Southland, nor did dogs pack burdens on their backs.  So he rendered fealty in the new way, by running with the master’s horse.  The longest day never played White Fang out.  His was the gait of the wolf, smooth, tireless and effortless, and at the end of fifty miles he would come in jauntily ahead of the horse.

It was in connection with the riding, that White Fang achieved one other mode of expression—remarkable in that he did it but twice in all his life.  The first time occurred when the master was trying to teach a spirited thoroughbred the method of opening and closing gates without the rider’s dismounting.  Time and again and many times he ranged the horse up to the gate in the effort to close it and each time the horse became frightened and backed and plunged away.  It grew more nervous and excited every moment.  When it reared, the master put the spurs to it and made it drop its fore-legs back to earth, whereupon it would begin kicking with its hind-legs.  White Fang watched the performance with increasing anxiety until he could contain himself no longer, when he sprang in front of the horse and barked savagely and warningly.

Though he often tried to bark thereafter, and the master encouraged him, he succeeded only once, and then it was not in the master’s presence.  A scamper across the pasture, a jackrabbit rising suddenly under the horse’s feet, a violent sheer, a stumble, a fall to earth, and a broken leg for the master, was the cause of it.  White Fang sprang in a rage at the throat of the offending horse, but was checked by the master’s voice.

“Home!  Go home!” the master commanded when he had ascertained his injury.

White Fang was disinclined to desert him.  The master thought of writing a note, but searched his pockets vainly for pencil and paper.  Again he commanded White Fang to go home.

The latter regarded him wistfully, started away, then returned and whined softly.  The master talked to him gently but seriously, and he cocked his ears, and listened with painful intentness.

“That’s all right, old fellow, you just run along home,” ran the talk.  “Go on home and tell them what’s happened to me.  Home with you, you wolf.  Get along home!”

White Fang knew the meaning of “home,” and though he did not understand the remainder of the master’s language, he knew it was his will that he should go home.  He turned and trotted reluctantly away.  Then he stopped, undecided, and looked back over his shoulder.

“Go home!” came the sharp command, and this time he obeyed.

The family was on the porch, taking the cool of the afternoon, when White Fang arrived.  He came in among them, panting, covered with dust.

“Weedon’s back,” Weedon’s mother announced.

The children welcomed White Fang with glad cries and ran to meet him.  He avoided them and passed down the porch, but they cornered him against a rocking-chair and the railing.  He growled and tried to push by them.  Their mother looked apprehensively in their direction.

“I confess, he makes me nervous around the children,” she said.  “I have a dread that he will turn upon them unexpectedly some day.”

Growling savagely, White Fang sprang out of the corner, overturning the boy and the girl.  The mother called them to her and comforted them, telling them not to bother White Fang.

“A wolf is a wolf!” commented Judge Scott.  “There is no trusting one.”

“But he is not all wolf,” interposed Beth, standing for her brother in his absence.

“You have only Weedon’s opinion for that,” rejoined the judge.  “He merely surmises that there is some strain of dog in White Fang; but as he will tell you himself, he knows nothing about it.  As for his appearance—”

He did not finish his sentence.  White Fang stood before him, growling fiercely.

“Go away!  Lie down, sir!” Judge Scott commanded.

White Fang turned to the love-master’s wife.  She screamed with fright as he seized her dress in his teeth and dragged on it till the frail fabric tore away.  By this time he had become the centre of interest.

He had ceased from his growling and stood, head up, looking into their faces.  His throat worked spasmodically, but made no sound, while he struggled with all his body, convulsed with the effort to rid himself of the incommunicable something that strained for utterance.

“I hope he is not going mad,” said Weedon’s mother.  “I told Weedon that I was afraid the warm climate would not agree with an Arctic animal.”

“He’s trying to speak, I do believe,” Beth announced.

At this moment speech came to White Fang, rushing up in a great burst of barking.

“Something has happened to Weedon,” his wife said decisively.

They were all on their feet now, and White Fang ran down the steps, looking back for them to follow.  For the second and last time in his life he had barked and made himself understood.

After this event he found a warmer place in the hearts of the Sierra Vista people, and even the groom whose arm he had slashed admitted that he was a wise dog even if he was a wolf.  Judge Scott still held to the same opinion, and proved it to everybody’s dissatisfaction by measurements and descriptions taken from the encyclopaedia and various works on natural history.

The days came and went, streaming their unbroken sunshine over the Santa Clara Valley.  But as they grew shorter and White Fang’s second winter in the Southland came on, he made a strange discovery.  Collie’s teeth were no longer sharp.  There was a playfulness about her nips and a gentleness that prevented them from really hurting him.  He forgot that she had made life a burden to him, and when she disported herself around him he responded solemnly, striving to be playful and becoming no more than ridiculous.

One day she led him off on a long chase through the back-pasture land into the woods.  It was the afternoon that the master was to ride, and White Fang knew it.  The horse stood saddled and waiting at the door.  White Fang hesitated.  But there was that in him deeper than all the law he had learned, than the customs that had moulded him, than his love for the master, than the very will to live of himself; and when, in the moment of his indecision, Collie nipped him and scampered off, he turned and followed after.  The master rode alone that day; and in the woods, side by side, White Fang ran with Collie, as his mother, Kiche, and old One Eye had run long years before in the silent Northland forest.
CHAPTER V—THE SLEEPING WOLF

It was about this time that the newspapers were full of the daring escape of a convict from San Quentin prison.  He was a ferocious man.  He had been ill-made in the making.  He had not been born right, and he had not been helped any by the moulding he had received at the hands of society.  The hands of society are harsh, and this man was a striking sample of its handiwork.  He was a beast—a human beast, it is true, but nevertheless so terrible a beast that he can best be characterised as carnivorous.

In San Quentin prison he had proved incorrigible.  Punishment failed to break his spirit.  He could die dumb-mad and fighting to the last, but he could not live and be beaten.  The more fiercely he fought, the more harshly society handled him, and the only effect of harshness was to make him fiercer.  Strait-jackets, starvation, and beatings and clubbings were the wrong treatment for Jim Hall; but it was the treatment he received.  It was the treatment he had received from the time he was a little pulpy boy in a San Francisco slum—soft clay in the hands of society and ready to be formed into something.

It was during Jim Hall’s third term in prison that he encountered a guard that was almost as great a beast as he.  The guard treated him unfairly, lied about him to the warden, lost his credits, persecuted him.  The difference between them was that the guard carried a bunch of keys and a revolver.  Jim Hall had only his naked hands and his teeth.  But he sprang upon the guard one day and used his teeth on the other’s throat just like any jungle animal.

After this, Jim Hall went to live in the incorrigible cell.  He lived there three years.  The cell was of iron, the floor, the walls, the roof.  He never left this cell.  He never saw the sky nor the sunshine.  Day was a twilight and night was a black silence.  He was in an iron tomb, buried alive.  He saw no human face, spoke to no human thing.  When his food was shoved in to him, he growled like a wild animal.  He hated all things.  For days and nights he bellowed his rage at the universe.  For weeks and months he never made a sound, in the black silence eating his very soul.  He was a man and a monstrosity, as fearful a thing of fear as ever gibbered in the visions of a maddened brain.

And then, one night, he escaped.  The warders said it was impossible, but nevertheless the cell was empty, and half in half out of it lay the body of a dead guard.  Two other dead guards marked his trail through the prison to the outer walls, and he had killed with his hands to avoid noise.

He was armed with the weapons of the slain guards—a live arsenal that fled through the hills pursued by the organised might of society.  A heavy price of gold was upon his head.  Avaricious farmers hunted him with shot-guns.  His blood might pay off a mortgage or send a son to college.  Public-spirited citizens took down their rifles and went out after him.  A pack of bloodhounds followed the way of his bleeding feet.  And the sleuth-hounds of the law, the paid fighting animals of society, with telephone, and telegraph, and special train, clung to his trail night and day.

Sometimes they came upon him, and men faced him like heroes, or stampeded through barbed-wire fences to the delight of the commonwealth reading the account at the breakfast table.  It was after such encounters that the dead and wounded were carted back to the towns, and their places filled by men eager for the man-hunt.

And then Jim Hall disappeared.  The bloodhounds vainly quested on the lost trail.  Inoffensive ranchers in remote valleys were held up by armed men and compelled to identify themselves.  While the remains of Jim Hall were discovered on a dozen mountain-sides by greedy claimants for blood-money.

In the meantime the newspapers were read at Sierra Vista, not so much with interest as with anxiety.  The women were afraid.  Judge Scott pooh-poohed and laughed, but not with reason, for it was in his last days on the bench that Jim Hall had stood before him and received sentence.  And in open court-room, before all men, Jim Hall had proclaimed that the day would come when he would wreak vengeance on the Judge that sentenced him.

For once, Jim Hall was right.  He was innocent of the crime for which he was sentenced.  It was a case, in the parlance of thieves and police, of “rail-roading.”  Jim Hall was being “rail-roaded” to prison for a crime he had not committed.  Because of the two prior convictions against him, Judge Scott imposed upon him a sentence of fifty years.

Judge Scott did not know all things, and he did not know that he was party to a police conspiracy, that the evidence was hatched and perjured, that Jim Hall was guiltless of the crime charged.  And Jim Hall, on the other hand, did not know that Judge Scott was merely ignorant.  Jim Hall believed that the judge knew all about it and was hand in glove with the police in the perpetration of the monstrous injustice.  So it was, when the doom of fifty years of living death was uttered by Judge Scott, that Jim Hall, hating all things in the society that misused him, rose up and raged in the court-room until dragged down by half a dozen of his blue-coated enemies.  To him, Judge Scott was the keystone in the arch of injustice, and upon Judge Scott he emptied the vials of his wrath and hurled the threats of his revenge yet to come.  Then Jim Hall went to his living death . . . and escaped.

Of all this White Fang knew nothing.  But between him and Alice, the master’s wife, there existed a secret.  Each night, after Sierra Vista had gone to bed, she rose and let in White Fang to sleep in the big hall.  Now White Fang was not a house-dog, nor was he permitted to sleep in the house; so each morning, early, she slipped down and let him out before the family was awake.

On one such night, while all the house slept, White Fang awoke and lay very quietly.  And very quietly he smelled the air and read the message it bore of a strange god’s presence.  And to his ears came sounds of the strange god’s movements.  White Fang burst into no furious outcry.  It was not his way.  The strange god walked softly, but more softly walked White Fang, for he had no clothes to rub against the flesh of his body.  He followed silently.  In the Wild he had hunted live meat that was infinitely timid, and he knew the advantage of surprise.

The strange god paused at the foot of the great staircase and listened, and White Fang was as dead, so without movement was he as he watched and waited.  Up that staircase the way led to the love-master and to the love-master’s dearest possessions.  White Fang bristled, but waited.  The strange god’s foot lifted.  He was beginning the ascent.

Then it was that White Fang struck.  He gave no warning, with no snarl anticipated his own action.  Into the air he lifted his body in the spring that landed him on the strange god’s back.  White Fang clung with his fore-paws to the man’s shoulders, at the same time burying his fangs into the back of the man’s neck.  He clung on for a moment, long enough to drag the god over backward.  Together they crashed to the floor.  White Fang leaped clear, and, as the man struggled to rise, was in again with the slashing fangs.

Sierra Vista awoke in alarm.  The noise from downstairs was as that of a score of battling fiends.  There were revolver shots.  A man’s voice screamed once in horror and anguish.  There was a great snarling and growling, and over all arose a smashing and crashing of furniture and glass.

But almost as quickly as it had arisen, the commotion died away.  The struggle had not lasted more than three minutes.  The frightened household clustered at the top of the stairway.  From below, as from out an abyss of blackness, came up a gurgling sound, as of air bubbling through water.  Sometimes this gurgle became sibilant, almost a whistle.  But this, too, quickly died down and ceased.  Then naught came up out of the blackness save a heavy panting of some creature struggling sorely for air.

Weedon Scott pressed a button, and the staircase and downstairs hall were flooded with light.  Then he and Judge Scott, revolvers in hand, cautiously descended.  There was no need for this caution.  White Fang had done his work.  In the midst of the wreckage of overthrown and smashed furniture, partly on his side, his face hidden by an arm, lay a man.  Weedon Scott bent over, removed the arm and turned the man’s face upward.  A gaping throat explained the manner of his death.

“Jim Hall,” said Judge Scott, and father and son looked significantly at each other.

Then they turned to White Fang.  He, too, was lying on his side.  His eyes were closed, but the lids slightly lifted in an effort to look at them as they bent over him, and the tail was perceptibly agitated in a vain effort to wag.  Weedon Scott patted him, and his throat rumbled an acknowledging growl.  But it was a weak growl at best, and it quickly ceased.  His eyelids drooped and went shut, and his whole body seemed to relax and flatten out upon the floor.

“He’s all in, poor devil,” muttered the master.

“We’ll see about that,” asserted the Judge, as he started for the telephone.

“Frankly, he has one chance in a thousand,” announced the surgeon, after he had worked an hour and a half on White Fang.

Dawn was breaking through the windows and dimming the electric lights.  With the exception of the children, the whole family was gathered about the surgeon to hear his verdict.

“One broken hind-leg,” he went on.  “Three broken ribs, one at least of which has pierced the lungs.  He has lost nearly all the blood in his body.  There is a large likelihood of internal injuries.  He must have been jumped upon.  To say nothing of three bullet holes clear through him.  One chance in a thousand is really optimistic.  He hasn’t a chance in ten thousand.”

“But he mustn’t lose any chance that might be of help to him,” Judge Scott exclaimed.  “Never mind expense.  Put him under the X-ray—anything.  Weedon, telegraph at once to San Francisco for Doctor Nichols.  No reflection on you, doctor, you understand; but he must have the advantage of every chance.”

The surgeon smiled indulgently.  “Of course I understand.  He deserves all that can be done for him.  He must be nursed as you would nurse a human being, a sick child.  And don’t forget what I told you about temperature.  I’ll be back at ten o’clock again.”

White Fang received the nursing.  Judge Scott’s suggestion of a trained nurse was indignantly clamoured down by the girls, who themselves undertook the task.  And White Fang won out on the one chance in ten thousand denied him by the surgeon.

The latter was not to be censured for his misjudgment.  All his life he had tended and operated on the soft humans of civilisation, who lived sheltered lives and had descended out of many sheltered generations.  Compared with White Fang, they were frail and flabby, and clutched life without any strength in their grip.  White Fang had come straight from the Wild, where the weak perish early and shelter is vouchsafed to none.  In neither his father nor his mother was there any weakness, nor in the generations before them.  A constitution of iron and the vitality of the Wild were White Fang’s inheritance, and he clung to life, the whole of him and every part of him, in spirit and in flesh, with the tenacity that of old belonged to all creatures.

Bound down a prisoner, denied even movement by the plaster casts and bandages, White Fang lingered out the weeks.  He slept long hours and dreamed much, and through his mind passed an unending pageant of Northland visions.  All the ghosts of the past arose and were with him.  Once again he lived in the lair with Kiche, crept trembling to the knees of Grey Beaver to tender his allegiance, ran for his life before Lip-lip and all the howling bedlam of the puppy-pack.

He ran again through the silence, hunting his living food through the months of famine; and again he ran at the head of the team, the gut-whips of Mit-sah and Grey Beaver snapping behind, their voices crying “Ra! Raa!” when they came to a narrow passage and the team closed together like a fan to go through.  He lived again all his days with Beauty Smith and the fights he had fought.  At such times he whimpered and snarled in his sleep, and they that looked on said that his dreams were bad.

But there was one particular nightmare from which he suffered—the clanking, clanging monsters of electric cars that were to him colossal screaming lynxes.  He would lie in a screen of bushes, watching for a squirrel to venture far enough out on the ground from its tree-refuge.  Then, when he sprang out upon it, it would transform itself into an electric car, menacing and terrible, towering over him like a mountain, screaming and clanging and spitting fire at him.  It was the same when he challenged the hawk down out of the sky.  Down out of the blue it would rush, as it dropped upon him changing itself into the ubiquitous electric car.  Or again, he would be in the pen of Beauty Smith.  Outside the pen, men would be gathering, and he knew that a fight was on.  He watched the door for his antagonist to enter.  The door would open, and thrust in upon him would come the awful electric car.  A thousand times this occurred, and each time the terror it inspired was as vivid and great as ever.

Then came the day when the last bandage and the last plaster cast were taken off.  It was a gala day.  All Sierra Vista was gathered around.  The master rubbed his ears, and he crooned his love-growl.  The master’s wife called him the “Blessed Wolf,” which name was taken up with acclaim and all the women called him the Blessed Wolf.

He tried to rise to his feet, and after several attempts fell down from weakness.  He had lain so long that his muscles had lost their cunning, and all the strength had gone out of them.  He felt a little shame because of his weakness, as though, forsooth, he were failing the gods in the service he owed them.  Because of this he made heroic efforts to arise and at last he stood on his four legs, tottering and swaying back and forth.

“The Blessed Wolf!” chorused the women.

Judge Scott surveyed them triumphantly.

“Out of your own mouths be it,” he said.  “Just as I contended right along.  No mere dog could have done what he did.  He’s a wolf.”

“A Blessed Wolf,” amended the Judge’s wife.

“Yes, Blessed Wolf,” agreed the Judge.  “And henceforth that shall be my name for him.”

“He’ll have to learn to walk again,” said the surgeon; “so he might as well start in right now.  It won’t hurt him.  Take him outside.”

And outside he went, like a king, with all Sierra Vista about him and tending on him.  He was very weak, and when he reached the lawn he lay down and rested for a while.

Then the procession started on, little spurts of strength coming into White Fang’s muscles as he used them and the blood began to surge through them.  The stables were reached, and there in the doorway, lay Collie, a half-dozen pudgy puppies playing about her in the sun.

White Fang looked on with a wondering eye.  Collie snarled warningly at him, and he was careful to keep his distance.  The master with his toe helped one sprawling puppy toward him.  He bristled suspiciously, but the master warned him that all was well.  Collie, clasped in the arms of one of the women, watched him jealously and with a snarl warned him that all was not well.

The puppy sprawled in front of him.  He cocked his ears and watched it curiously.  Then their noses touched, and he felt the warm little tongue of the puppy on his jowl.  White Fang’s tongue went out, he knew not why, and he licked the puppy’s face.

Hand-clapping and pleased cries from the gods greeted the performance.  He was surprised, and looked at them in a puzzled way.  Then his weakness asserted itself, and he lay down, his ears cocked, his head on one side, as he watched the puppy.  The other puppies came sprawling toward him, to Collie’s great disgust; and he gravely permitted them to clamber and tumble over him.  At first, amid the applause of the gods, he betrayed a trifle of his old self-consciousness and awkwardness.  This passed away as the puppies’ antics and mauling continued, and he lay with half-shut patient eyes, drowsing in the sun.


CHAPTER I


I scarcely know where to begin, though I sometimes facetiously place the
cause of it all to Charley Furuseth’s credit.  He kept a summer cottage
in Mill Valley, under the shadow of Mount Tamalpais, and never occupied
it except when he loafed through the winter months and read Nietzsche and
Schopenhauer to rest his brain.  When summer came on, he elected to sweat
out a hot and dusty existence in the city and to toil incessantly.  Had
it not been my custom to run up to see him every Saturday afternoon and
to stop over till Monday morning, this particular January Monday morning
would not have found me afloat on San Francisco Bay.

Not but that I was afloat in a safe craft, for the _Martinez_ was a new
ferry-steamer, making her fourth or fifth trip on the run between
Sausalito and San Francisco.  The danger lay in the heavy fog which
blanketed the bay, and of which, as a landsman, I had little
apprehension.  In fact, I remember the placid exaltation with which I
took up my position on the forward upper deck, directly beneath the
pilot-house, and allowed the mystery of the fog to lay hold of my
imagination.  A fresh breeze was blowing, and for a time I was alone in
the moist obscurity—yet not alone, for I was dimly conscious of the
presence of the pilot, and of what I took to be the captain, in the glass
house above my head.

I remember thinking how comfortable it was, this division of labour which
made it unnecessary for me to study fogs, winds, tides, and navigation,
in order to visit my friend who lived across an arm of the sea.  It was
good that men should be specialists, I mused.  The peculiar knowledge of
the pilot and captain sufficed for many thousands of people who knew no
more of the sea and navigation than I knew.  On the other hand, instead
of having to devote my energy to the learning of a multitude of things, I
concentrated it upon a few particular things, such as, for instance, the
analysis of Poe’s place in American literature—an essay of mine, by the
way, in the current _Atlantic_.  Coming aboard, as I passed through the
cabin, I had noticed with greedy eyes a stout gentleman reading the
_Atlantic_, which was open at my very essay.  And there it was again, the
division of labour, the special knowledge of the pilot and captain which
permitted the stout gentleman to read my special knowledge on Poe while
they carried him safely from Sausalito to San Francisco.

A red-faced man, slamming the cabin door behind him and stumping out on
the deck, interrupted my reflections, though I made a mental note of the
topic for use in a projected essay which I had thought of calling “The
Necessity for Freedom: A Plea for the Artist.”  The red-faced man shot a
glance up at the pilot-house, gazed around at the fog, stumped across the
deck and back (he evidently had artificial legs), and stood still by my
side, legs wide apart, and with an expression of keen enjoyment on his
face.  I was not wrong when I decided that his days had been spent on the
sea.

“It’s nasty weather like this here that turns heads grey before their
time,” he said, with a nod toward the pilot-house.

“I had not thought there was any particular strain,” I answered.  “It
seems as simple as A, B, C.  They know the direction by compass, the
distance, and the speed.  I should not call it anything more than
mathematical certainty.”

“Strain!” he snorted.  “Simple as A, B, C!  Mathematical certainty!”

He seemed to brace himself up and lean backward against the air as he
stared at me.  “How about this here tide that’s rushin’ out through the
Golden Gate?” he demanded, or bellowed, rather.  “How fast is she ebbin’?
What’s the drift, eh?  Listen to that, will you?  A bell-buoy, and we’re
a-top of it!  See ’em alterin’ the course!”

From out of the fog came the mournful tolling of a bell, and I could see
the pilot turning the wheel with great rapidity.  The bell, which had
seemed straight ahead, was now sounding from the side.  Our own whistle
was blowing hoarsely, and from time to time the sound of other whistles
came to us from out of the fog.

“That’s a ferry-boat of some sort,” the new-comer said, indicating a
whistle off to the right.  “And there!  D’ye hear that?  Blown by mouth.
Some scow schooner, most likely.  Better watch out, Mr. Schooner-man.
Ah, I thought so.  Now hell’s a poppin’ for somebody!”

The unseen ferry-boat was blowing blast after blast, and the mouth-blown
horn was tooting in terror-stricken fashion.

“And now they’re payin’ their respects to each other and tryin’ to get
clear,” the red-faced man went on, as the hurried whistling ceased.

His face was shining, his eyes flashing with excitement as he translated
into articulate language the speech of the horns and sirens.  “That’s a
steam-siren a-goin’ it over there to the left.  And you hear that fellow
with a frog in his throat—a steam schooner as near as I can judge,
crawlin’ in from the Heads against the tide.”

A shrill little whistle, piping as if gone mad, came from directly ahead
and from very near at hand.  Gongs sounded on the _Martinez_.  Our
paddle-wheels stopped, their pulsing beat died away, and then they
started again.  The shrill little whistle, like the chirping of a cricket
amid the cries of great beasts, shot through the fog from more to the
side and swiftly grew faint and fainter.  I looked to my companion for
enlightenment.

“One of them dare-devil launches,” he said.  “I almost wish we’d sunk
him, the little rip!  They’re the cause of more trouble.  And what good
are they?  Any jackass gets aboard one and runs it from hell to
breakfast, blowin’ his whistle to beat the band and tellin’ the rest of
the world to look out for him, because he’s comin’ and can’t look out for
himself!  Because he’s comin’!  And you’ve got to look out, too!  Right
of way!  Common decency!  They don’t know the meanin’ of it!”

I felt quite amused at his unwarranted choler, and while he stumped
indignantly up and down I fell to dwelling upon the romance of the fog.
And romantic it certainly was—the fog, like the grey shadow of infinite
mystery, brooding over the whirling speck of earth; and men, mere motes
of light and sparkle, cursed with an insane relish for work, riding their
steeds of wood and steel through the heart of the mystery, groping their
way blindly through the Unseen, and clamouring and clanging in confident
speech the while their hearts are heavy with incertitude and fear.

The voice of my companion brought me back to myself with a laugh.  I too
had been groping and floundering, the while I thought I rode clear-eyed
through the mystery.

“Hello! somebody comin’ our way,” he was saying.  “And d’ye hear that?
He’s comin’ fast.  Walking right along.  Guess he don’t hear us yet.
Wind’s in wrong direction.”

The fresh breeze was blowing right down upon us, and I could hear the
whistle plainly, off to one side and a little ahead.

“Ferry-boat?” I asked.

He nodded, then added, “Or he wouldn’t be keepin’ up such a clip.”  He
gave a short chuckle.  “They’re gettin’ anxious up there.”

I glanced up.  The captain had thrust his head and shoulders out of the
pilot-house, and was staring intently into the fog as though by sheer
force of will he could penetrate it.  His face was anxious, as was the
face of my companion, who had stumped over to the rail and was gazing
with a like intentness in the direction of the invisible danger.

Then everything happened, and with inconceivable rapidity.  The fog
seemed to break away as though split by a wedge, and the bow of a
steamboat emerged, trailing fog-wreaths on either side like seaweed on
the snout of Leviathan.  I could see the pilot-house and a white-bearded
man leaning partly out of it, on his elbows.  He was clad in a blue
uniform, and I remember noting how trim and quiet he was.  His quietness,
under the circumstances, was terrible.  He accepted Destiny, marched hand
in hand with it, and coolly measured the stroke.  As he leaned there, he
ran a calm and speculative eye over us, as though to determine the
precise point of the collision, and took no notice whatever when our
pilot, white with rage, shouted, “Now you’ve done it!”

On looking back, I realize that the remark was too obvious to make
rejoinder necessary.

“Grab hold of something and hang on,” the red-faced man said to me.  All
his bluster had gone, and he seemed to have caught the contagion of
preternatural calm.  “And listen to the women scream,” he said
grimly—almost bitterly, I thought, as though he had been through the
experience before.

The vessels came together before I could follow his advice.  We must have
been struck squarely amidships, for I saw nothing, the strange steamboat
having passed beyond my line of vision.  The _Martinez_ heeled over,
sharply, and there was a crashing and rending of timber.  I was thrown
flat on the wet deck, and before I could scramble to my feet I heard the
scream of the women.  This it was, I am certain,—the most indescribable
of blood-curdling sounds,—that threw me into a panic.  I remembered the
life-preservers stored in the cabin, but was met at the door and swept
backward by a wild rush of men and women.  What happened in the next few
minutes I do not recollect, though I have a clear remembrance of pulling
down life-preservers from the overhead racks, while the red-faced man
fastened them about the bodies of an hysterical group of women.  This
memory is as distinct and sharp as that of any picture I have seen.  It
is a picture, and I can see it now,—the jagged edges of the hole in the
side of the cabin, through which the grey fog swirled and eddied; the
empty upholstered seats, littered with all the evidences of sudden
flight, such as packages, hand satchels, umbrellas, and wraps; the stout
gentleman who had been reading my essay, encased in cork and canvas, the
magazine still in his hand, and asking me with monotonous insistence if I
thought there was any danger; the red-faced man, stumping gallantly
around on his artificial legs and buckling life-preservers on all comers;
and finally, the screaming bedlam of women.

This it was, the screaming of the women, that most tried my nerves.  It
must have tried, too, the nerves of the red-faced man, for I have another
picture which will never fade from my mind.  The stout gentleman is
stuffing the magazine into his overcoat pocket and looking on curiously.
A tangled mass of women, with drawn, white faces and open mouths, is
shrieking like a chorus of lost souls; and the red-faced man, his face
now purplish with wrath, and with arms extended overhead as in the act of
hurling thunderbolts, is shouting, “Shut up!  Oh, shut up!”

I remember the scene impelled me to sudden laughter, and in the next
instant I realized I was becoming hysterical myself; for these were women
of my own kind, like my mother and sisters, with the fear of death upon
them and unwilling to die.  And I remember that the sounds they made
reminded me of the squealing of pigs under the knife of the butcher, and
I was struck with horror at the vividness of the analogy.  These women,
capable of the most sublime emotions, of the tenderest sympathies, were
open-mouthed and screaming.  They wanted to live, they were helpless,
like rats in a trap, and they screamed.

The horror of it drove me out on deck.  I was feeling sick and squeamish,
and sat down on a bench.  In a hazy way I saw and heard men rushing and
shouting as they strove to lower the boats.  It was just as I had read
descriptions of such scenes in books.  The tackles jammed.  Nothing
worked.  One boat lowered away with the plugs out, filled with women and
children and then with water, and capsized.  Another boat had been
lowered by one end, and still hung in the tackle by the other end, where
it had been abandoned.  Nothing was to be seen of the strange steamboat
which had caused the disaster, though I heard men saying that she would
undoubtedly send boats to our assistance.

I descended to the lower deck.  The _Martinez_ was sinking fast, for the
water was very near.  Numbers of the passengers were leaping overboard.
Others, in the water, were clamouring to be taken aboard again.  No one
heeded them.  A cry arose that we were sinking.  I was seized by the
consequent panic, and went over the side in a surge of bodies.  How I
went over I do not know, though I did know, and instantly, why those in
the water were so desirous of getting back on the steamer.  The water was
cold—so cold that it was painful.  The pang, as I plunged into it, was as
quick and sharp as that of fire.  It bit to the marrow.  It was like the
grip of death.  I gasped with the anguish and shock of it, filling my
lungs before the life-preserver popped me to the surface.  The taste of
the salt was strong in my mouth, and I was strangling with the acrid
stuff in my throat and lungs.

But it was the cold that was most distressing.  I felt that I could
survive but a few minutes.  People were struggling and floundering in the
water about me.  I could hear them crying out to one another.  And I
heard, also, the sound of oars.  Evidently the strange steamboat had
lowered its boats.  As the time went by I marvelled that I was still
alive.  I had no sensation whatever in my lower limbs, while a chilling
numbness was wrapping about my heart and creeping into it.  Small waves,
with spiteful foaming crests, continually broke over me and into my
mouth, sending me off into more strangling paroxysms.

The noises grew indistinct, though I heard a final and despairing chorus
of screams in the distance, and knew that the _Martinez_ had gone down.
Later,—how much later I have no knowledge,—I came to myself with a start
of fear.  I was alone.  I could hear no calls or cries—only the sound of
the waves, made weirdly hollow and reverberant by the fog.  A panic in a
crowd, which partakes of a sort of community of interest, is not so
terrible as a panic when one is by oneself; and such a panic I now
suffered.  Whither was I drifting?  The red-faced man had said that the
tide was ebbing through the Golden Gate.  Was I, then, being carried out
to sea?  And the life-preserver in which I floated?  Was it not liable to
go to pieces at any moment?  I had heard of such things being made of
paper and hollow rushes which quickly became saturated and lost all
buoyancy.  And I could not swim a stroke.  And I was alone, floating,
apparently, in the midst of a grey primordial vastness.  I confess that a
madness seized me, that I shrieked aloud as the women had shrieked, and
beat the water with my numb hands.

How long this lasted I have no conception, for a blankness intervened, of
which I remember no more than one remembers of troubled and painful
sleep.  When I aroused, it was as after centuries of time; and I saw,
almost above me and emerging from the fog, the bow of a vessel, and three
triangular sails, each shrewdly lapping the other and filled with wind.
Where the bow cut the water there was a great foaming and gurgling, and I
seemed directly in its path.  I tried to cry out, but was too exhausted.
The bow plunged down, just missing me and sending a swash of water clear
over my head.  Then the long, black side of the vessel began slipping
past, so near that I could have touched it with my hands.  I tried to
reach it, in a mad resolve to claw into the wood with my nails, but my
arms were heavy and lifeless.  Again I strove to call out, but made no
sound.

The stern of the vessel shot by, dropping, as it did so, into a hollow
between the waves; and I caught a glimpse of a man standing at the wheel,
and of another man who seemed to be doing little else than smoke a cigar.
I saw the smoke issuing from his lips as he slowly turned his head and
glanced out over the water in my direction.  It was a careless,
unpremeditated glance, one of those haphazard things men do when they
have no immediate call to do anything in particular, but act because they
are alive and must do something.

But life and death were in that glance.  I could see the vessel being
swallowed up in the fog; I saw the back of the man at the wheel, and the
head of the other man turning, slowly turning, as his gaze struck the
water and casually lifted along it toward me.  His face wore an absent
expression, as of deep thought, and I became afraid that if his eyes did
light upon me he would nevertheless not see me.  But his eyes did light
upon me, and looked squarely into mine; and he did see me, for he sprang
to the wheel, thrusting the other man aside, and whirled it round and
round, hand over hand, at the same time shouting orders of some sort.
The vessel seemed to go off at a tangent to its former course and leapt
almost instantly from view into the fog.

I felt myself slipping into unconsciousness, and tried with all the power
of my will to fight above the suffocating blankness and darkness that was
rising around me.  A little later I heard the stroke of oars, growing
nearer and nearer, and the calls of a man.  When he was very near I heard
him crying, in vexed fashion, “Why in hell don’t you sing out?”  This
meant me, I thought, and then the blankness and darkness rose over me.




CHAPTER II


I seemed swinging in a mighty rhythm through orbit vastness.  Sparkling
points of light spluttered and shot past me.  They were stars, I knew,
and flaring comets, that peopled my flight among the suns.  As I reached
the limit of my swing and prepared to rush back on the counter swing, a
great gong struck and thundered.  For an immeasurable period, lapped in
the rippling of placid centuries, I enjoyed and pondered my tremendous
flight.

But a change came over the face of the dream, for a dream I told myself
it must be.  My rhythm grew shorter and shorter.  I was jerked from swing
to counter swing with irritating haste.  I could scarcely catch my
breath, so fiercely was I impelled through the heavens.  The gong
thundered more frequently and more furiously.  I grew to await it with a
nameless dread.  Then it seemed as though I were being dragged over
rasping sands, white and hot in the sun.  This gave place to a sense of
intolerable anguish.  My skin was scorching in the torment of fire.  The
gong clanged and knelled.  The sparkling points of light flashed past me
in an interminable stream, as though the whole sidereal system were
dropping into the void.  I gasped, caught my breath painfully, and opened
my eyes.  Two men were kneeling beside me, working over me.  My mighty
rhythm was the lift and forward plunge of a ship on the sea.  The
terrific gong was a frying-pan, hanging on the wall, that rattled and
clattered with each leap of the ship.  The rasping, scorching sands were
a man’s hard hands chafing my naked chest.  I squirmed under the pain of
it, and half lifted my head.  My chest was raw and red, and I could see
tiny blood globules starting through the torn and inflamed cuticle.

“That’ll do, Yonson,” one of the men said.  “Carn’t yer see you’ve
bloomin’ well rubbed all the gent’s skin orf?”

The man addressed as Yonson, a man of the heavy Scandinavian type, ceased
chafing me, and arose awkwardly to his feet.  The man who had spoken to
him was clearly a Cockney, with the clean lines and weakly pretty, almost
effeminate, face of the man who has absorbed the sound of Bow Bells with
his mother’s milk.  A draggled muslin cap on his head and a dirty
gunny-sack about his slim hips proclaimed him cook of the decidedly dirty
ship’s galley in which I found myself.

“An’ ’ow yer feelin’ now, sir?” he asked, with the subservient smirk
which comes only of generations of tip-seeking ancestors.

For reply, I twisted weakly into a sitting posture, and was helped by
Yonson to my feet.  The rattle and bang of the frying-pan was grating
horribly on my nerves.  I could not collect my thoughts.  Clutching the
woodwork of the galley for support,—and I confess the grease with which
it was scummed put my teeth on edge,—I reached across a hot cooking-range
to the offending utensil, unhooked it, and wedged it securely into the
coal-box.

The cook grinned at my exhibition of nerves, and thrust into my hand a
steaming mug with an “’Ere, this’ll do yer good.”  It was a nauseous
mess,—ship’s coffee,—but the heat of it was revivifying.  Between gulps
of the molten stuff I glanced down at my raw and bleeding chest and
turned to the Scandinavian.

“Thank you, Mr. Yonson,” I said; “but don’t you think your measures were
rather heroic?”

It was because he understood the reproof of my action, rather than of my
words, that he held up his palm for inspection.  It was remarkably
calloused.  I passed my hand over the horny projections, and my teeth
went on edge once more from the horrible rasping sensation produced.

“My name is Johnson, not Yonson,” he said, in very good, though slow,
English, with no more than a shade of accent to it.

There was mild protest in his pale blue eyes, and withal a timid
frankness and manliness that quite won me to him.

“Thank you, Mr. Johnson,” I corrected, and reached out my hand for his.

He hesitated, awkward and bashful, shifted his weight from one leg to the
other, then blunderingly gripped my hand in a hearty shake.

“Have you any dry clothes I may put on?” I asked the cook.

“Yes, sir,” he answered, with cheerful alacrity.  “I’ll run down an’ tyke
a look over my kit, if you’ve no objections, sir, to wearin’ my things.”

He dived out of the galley door, or glided rather, with a swiftness and
smoothness of gait that struck me as being not so much cat-like as oily.
In fact, this oiliness, or greasiness, as I was later to learn, was
probably the most salient expression of his personality.

“And where am I?” I asked Johnson, whom I took, and rightly, to be one of
the sailors.  “What vessel is this, and where is she bound?”

“Off the Farallones, heading about sou-west,” he answered, slowly and
methodically, as though groping for his best English, and rigidly
observing the order of my queries.  “The schooner _Ghost_, bound
seal-hunting to Japan.”

“And who is the captain?  I must see him as soon as I am dressed.”

Johnson looked puzzled and embarrassed.  He hesitated while he groped in
his vocabulary and framed a complete answer.  “The cap’n is Wolf Larsen,
or so men call him.  I never heard his other name.  But you better speak
soft with him.  He is mad this morning.  The mate—”

But he did not finish.  The cook had glided in.

“Better sling yer ’ook out of ’ere, Yonson,” he said.  “The old man’ll be
wantin’ yer on deck, an’ this ayn’t no d’y to fall foul of ’im.”

Johnson turned obediently to the door, at the same time, over the cook’s
shoulder, favouring me with an amazingly solemn and portentous wink as
though to emphasize his interrupted remark and the need for me to be
soft-spoken with the captain.

Hanging over the cook’s arm was a loose and crumpled array of
evil-looking and sour-smelling garments.

“They was put aw’y wet, sir,” he vouchsafed explanation.  “But you’ll
’ave to make them do till I dry yours out by the fire.”

Clinging to the woodwork, staggering with the roll of the ship, and aided
by the cook, I managed to slip into a rough woollen undershirt.  On the
instant my flesh was creeping and crawling from the harsh contact.  He
noticed my involuntary twitching and grimacing, and smirked:

“I only ’ope yer don’t ever ’ave to get used to such as that in this
life, ’cos you’ve got a bloomin’ soft skin, that you ’ave, more like a
lydy’s than any I know of.  I was bloomin’ well sure you was a gentleman
as soon as I set eyes on yer.”

I had taken a dislike to him at first, and as he helped to dress me this
dislike increased.  There was something repulsive about his touch.  I
shrank from his hand; my flesh revolted.  And between this and the smells
arising from various pots boiling and bubbling on the galley fire, I was
in haste to get out into the fresh air.  Further, there was the need of
seeing the captain about what arrangements could be made for getting me
ashore.

A cheap cotton shirt, with frayed collar and a bosom discoloured with
what I took to be ancient blood-stains, was put on me amid a running and
apologetic fire of comment.  A pair of workman’s brogans encased my feet,
and for trousers I was furnished with a pair of pale blue, washed-out
overalls, one leg of which was fully ten inches shorter than the other.
The abbreviated leg looked as though the devil had there clutched for the
Cockney’s soul and missed the shadow for the substance.

“And whom have I to thank for this kindness?” I asked, when I stood
completely arrayed, a tiny boy’s cap on my head, and for coat a dirty,
striped cotton jacket which ended at the small of my back and the sleeves
of which reached just below my elbows.

The cook drew himself up in a smugly humble fashion, a deprecating smirk
on his face.  Out of my experience with stewards on the Atlantic liners
at the end of the voyage, I could have sworn he was waiting for his tip.
From my fuller knowledge of the creature I now know that the posture was
unconscious.  An hereditary servility, no doubt, was responsible.

“Mugridge, sir,” he fawned, his effeminate features running into a greasy
smile.  “Thomas Mugridge, sir, an’ at yer service.”

“All right, Thomas,” I said.  “I shall not forget you—when my clothes are
dry.”

A soft light suffused his face and his eyes glistened, as though
somewhere in the deeps of his being his ancestors had quickened and
stirred with dim memories of tips received in former lives.

“Thank you, sir,” he said, very gratefully and very humbly indeed.

Precisely in the way that the door slid back, he slid aside, and I
stepped out on deck.  I was still weak from my prolonged immersion.  A
puff of wind caught me,—and I staggered across the moving deck to a
corner of the cabin, to which I clung for support.  The schooner, heeled
over far out from the perpendicular, was bowing and plunging into the
long Pacific roll.  If she were heading south-west as Johnson had said,
the wind, then, I calculated, was blowing nearly from the south.  The fog
was gone, and in its place the sun sparkled crisply on the surface of the
water, I turned to the east, where I knew California must lie, but could
see nothing save low-lying fog-banks—the same fog, doubtless, that had
brought about the disaster to the _Martinez_ and placed me in my present
situation.  To the north, and not far away, a group of naked rocks thrust
above the sea, on one of which I could distinguish a lighthouse.  In the
south-west, and almost in our course, I saw the pyramidal loom of some
vessel’s sails.

Having completed my survey of the horizon, I turned to my more immediate
surroundings.  My first thought was that a man who had come through a
collision and rubbed shoulders with death merited more attention than I
received.  Beyond a sailor at the wheel who stared curiously across the
top of the cabin, I attracted no notice whatever.

Everybody seemed interested in what was going on amid ships.  There, on a
hatch, a large man was lying on his back.  He was fully clothed, though
his shirt was ripped open in front.  Nothing was to be seen of his chest,
however, for it was covered with a mass of black hair, in appearance like
the furry coat of a dog.  His face and neck were hidden beneath a black
beard, intershot with grey, which would have been stiff and bushy had it
not been limp and draggled and dripping with water.  His eyes were
closed, and he was apparently unconscious; but his mouth was wide open,
his breast, heaving as though from suffocation as he laboured noisily for
breath.  A sailor, from time to time and quite methodically, as a matter
of routine, dropped a canvas bucket into the ocean at the end of a rope,
hauled it in hand under hand, and sluiced its contents over the prostrate
man.

Pacing back and forth the length of the hatchways and savagely chewing
the end of a cigar, was the man whose casual glance had rescued me from
the sea.  His height was probably five feet ten inches, or ten and a
half; but my first impression, or feel of the man, was not of this, but
of his strength.  And yet, while he was of massive build, with broad
shoulders and deep chest, I could not characterize his strength as
massive.  It was what might be termed a sinewy, knotty strength, of the
kind we ascribe to lean and wiry men, but which, in him, because of his
heavy build, partook more of the enlarged gorilla order.  Not that in
appearance he seemed in the least gorilla-like.  What I am striving to
express is this strength itself, more as a thing apart from his physical
semblance.  It was a strength we are wont to associate with things
primitive, with wild animals, and the creatures we imagine our
tree-dwelling prototypes to have been—a strength savage, ferocious, alive
in itself, the essence of life in that it is the potency of motion, the
elemental stuff itself out of which the many forms of life have been
moulded; in short, that which writhes in the body of a snake when the
head is cut off, and the snake, as a snake, is dead, or which lingers in
the shapeless lump of turtle-meat and recoils and quivers from the prod
of a finger.

Such was the impression of strength I gathered from this man who paced up
and down.  He was firmly planted on his legs; his feet struck the deck
squarely and with surety; every movement of a muscle, from the heave of
the shoulders to the tightening of the lips about the cigar, was
decisive, and seemed to come out of a strength that was excessive and
overwhelming.  In fact, though this strength pervaded every action of
his, it seemed but the advertisement of a greater strength that lurked
within, that lay dormant and no more than stirred from time to time, but
which might arouse, at any moment, terrible and compelling, like the rage
of a lion or the wrath of a storm.

The cook stuck his head out of the galley door and grinned encouragingly
at me, at the same time jerking his thumb in the direction of the man who
paced up and down by the hatchway.  Thus I was given to understand that
he was the captain, the “Old Man,” in the cook’s vernacular, the
individual whom I must interview and put to the trouble of somehow
getting me ashore.  I had half started forward, to get over with what I
was certain would be a stormy five minutes, when a more violent
suffocating paroxysm seized the unfortunate person who was lying on his
back.  He wrenched and writhed about convulsively.  The chin, with the
damp black beard, pointed higher in the air as the back muscles stiffened
and the chest swelled in an unconscious and instinctive effort to get
more air.  Under the whiskers, and all unseen, I knew that the skin was
taking on a purplish hue.

The captain, or Wolf Larsen, as men called him, ceased pacing and gazed
down at the dying man.  So fierce had this final struggle become that the
sailor paused in the act of flinging more water over him and stared
curiously, the canvas bucket partly tilted and dripping its contents to
the deck.  The dying man beat a tattoo on the hatch with his heels,
straightened out his legs, and stiffened in one great tense effort, and
rolled his head from side to side.  Then the muscles relaxed, the head
stopped rolling, and a sigh, as of profound relief, floated upward from
his lips.  The jaw dropped, the upper lip lifted, and two rows of
tobacco-discoloured teeth appeared.  It seemed as though his features had
frozen into a diabolical grin at the world he had left and outwitted.

Then a most surprising thing occurred.  The captain broke loose upon the
dead man like a thunderclap.  Oaths rolled from his lips in a continuous
stream.  And they were not namby-pamby oaths, or mere expressions of
indecency.  Each word was a blasphemy, and there were many words.  They
crisped and crackled like electric sparks.  I had never heard anything
like it in my life, nor could I have conceived it possible.  With a turn
for literary expression myself, and a penchant for forcible figures and
phrases, I appreciated, as no other listener, I dare say, the peculiar
vividness and strength and absolute blasphemy of his metaphors.  The
cause of it all, as near as I could make out, was that the man, who was
mate, had gone on a debauch before leaving San Francisco, and then had
the poor taste to die at the beginning of the voyage and leave Wolf
Larsen short-handed.

It should be unnecessary to state, at least to my friends, that I was
shocked.  Oaths and vile language of any sort had always been repellent
to me.  I felt a wilting sensation, a sinking at the heart, and, I might
just as well say, a giddiness.  To me, death had always been invested
with solemnity and dignity.  It had been peaceful in its occurrence,
sacred in its ceremonial.  But death in its more sordid and terrible
aspects was a thing with which I had been unacquainted till now.  As I
say, while I appreciated the power of the terrific denunciation that
swept out of Wolf Larsen’s mouth, I was inexpressibly shocked.  The
scorching torrent was enough to wither the face of the corpse.  I should
not have been surprised if the wet black beard had frizzled and curled
and flared up in smoke and flame.  But the dead man was unconcerned.  He
continued to grin with a sardonic humour, with a cynical mockery and
defiance.  He was master of the situation.




CHAPTER III


Wolf Larsen ceased swearing as suddenly as he had begun.  He relighted
his cigar and glanced around.  His eyes chanced upon the cook.

“Well, Cooky?” he began, with a suaveness that was cold and of the temper
of steel.

“Yes, sir,” the cook eagerly interpolated, with appeasing and apologetic
servility.

“Don’t you think you’ve stretched that neck of yours just about enough?
It’s unhealthy, you know.  The mate’s gone, so I can’t afford to lose you
too.  You must be very, very careful of your health, Cooky.  Understand?”

His last word, in striking contrast with the smoothness of his previous
utterance, snapped like the lash of a whip.  The cook quailed under it.

“Yes, sir,” was the meek reply, as the offending head disappeared into
the galley.

At this sweeping rebuke, which the cook had only pointed, the rest of the
crew became uninterested and fell to work at one task or another.  A
number of men, however, who were lounging about a companion-way between
the galley and hatch, and who did not seem to be sailors, continued
talking in low tones with one another.  These, I afterward learned, were
the hunters, the men who shot the seals, and a very superior breed to
common sailor-folk.

“Johansen!” Wolf Larsen called out.  A sailor stepped forward obediently.
“Get your palm and needle and sew the beggar up.  You’ll find some old
canvas in the sail-locker.  Make it do.”

“What’ll I put on his feet, sir?” the man asked, after the customary “Ay,
ay, sir.”

“We’ll see to that,” Wolf Larsen answered, and elevated his voice in a
call of “Cooky!”

Thomas Mugridge popped out of his galley like a jack-in-the-box.

“Go below and fill a sack with coal.”

“Any of you fellows got a Bible or Prayer-book?” was the captain’s next
demand, this time of the hunters lounging about the companion-way.

They shook their heads, and some one made a jocular remark which I did
not catch, but which raised a general laugh.

Wolf Larsen made the same demand of the sailors.  Bibles and Prayer-books
seemed scarce articles, but one of the men volunteered to pursue the
quest amongst the watch below, returning in a minute with the information
that there was none.

The captain shrugged his shoulders.  “Then we’ll drop him over without
any palavering, unless our clerical-looking castaway has the burial
service at sea by heart.”

By this time he had swung fully around and was facing me.  “You’re a
preacher, aren’t you?” he asked.

The hunters,—there were six of them,—to a man, turned and regarded me.  I
was painfully aware of my likeness to a scarecrow.  A laugh went up at my
appearance,—a laugh that was not lessened or softened by the dead man
stretched and grinning on the deck before us; a laugh that was as rough
and harsh and frank as the sea itself; that arose out of coarse feelings
and blunted sensibilities, from natures that knew neither courtesy nor
gentleness.

Wolf Larsen did not laugh, though his grey eyes lighted with a slight
glint of amusement; and in that moment, having stepped forward quite
close to him, I received my first impression of the man himself, of the
man as apart from his body, and from the torrent of blasphemy I had heard
him spew forth.  The face, with large features and strong lines, of the
square order, yet well filled out, was apparently massive at first sight;
but again, as with the body, the massiveness seemed to vanish, and a
conviction to grow of a tremendous and excessive mental or spiritual
strength that lay behind, sleeping in the deeps of his being.  The jaw,
the chin, the brow rising to a goodly height and swelling heavily above
the eyes,—these, while strong in themselves, unusually strong, seemed to
speak an immense vigour or virility of spirit that lay behind and beyond
and out of sight.  There was no sounding such a spirit, no measuring, no
determining of metes and bounds, nor neatly classifying in some
pigeon-hole with others of similar type.

The eyes—and it was my destiny to know them well—were large and handsome,
wide apart as the true artist’s are wide, sheltering under a heavy brow
and arched over by thick black eyebrows.  The eyes themselves were of
that baffling protean grey which is never twice the same; which runs
through many shades and colourings like intershot silk in sunshine; which
is grey, dark and light, and greenish-grey, and sometimes of the clear
azure of the deep sea.  They were eyes that masked the soul with a
thousand guises, and that sometimes opened, at rare moments, and allowed
it to rush up as though it were about to fare forth nakedly into the
world on some wonderful adventure,—eyes that could brood with the
hopeless sombreness of leaden skies; that could snap and crackle points
of fire like those which sparkle from a whirling sword; that could grow
chill as an arctic landscape, and yet again, that could warm and soften
and be all a-dance with love-lights, intense and masculine, luring and
compelling, which at the same time fascinate and dominate women till they
surrender in a gladness of joy and of relief and sacrifice.

But to return.  I told him that, unhappily for the burial service, I was
not a preacher, when he sharply demanded:

“What do you do for a living?”

I confess I had never had such a question asked me before, nor had I ever
canvassed it.  I was quite taken aback, and before I could find myself
had sillily stammered, “I—I am a gentleman.”

His lip curled in a swift sneer.

“I have worked, I do work,” I cried impetuously, as though he were my
judge and I required vindication, and at the same time very much aware of
my arrant idiocy in discussing the subject at all.

“For your living?”

There was something so imperative and masterful about him that I was
quite beside myself—“rattled,” as Furuseth would have termed it, like a
quaking child before a stern school-master.

“Who feeds you?” was his next question.

“I have an income,” I answered stoutly, and could have bitten my tongue
the next instant.  “All of which, you will pardon my observing, has
nothing whatsoever to do with what I wish to see you about.”

But he disregarded my protest.

“Who earned it?  Eh?  I thought so.  Your father.  You stand on dead
men’s legs.  You’ve never had any of your own.  You couldn’t walk alone
between two sunrises and hustle the meat for your belly for three meals.
Let me see your hand.”

His tremendous, dormant strength must have stirred, swiftly and
accurately, or I must have slept a moment, for before I knew it he had
stepped two paces forward, gripped my right hand in his, and held it up
for inspection.  I tried to withdraw it, but his fingers tightened,
without visible effort, till I thought mine would be crushed.  It is hard
to maintain one’s dignity under such circumstances.  I could not squirm
or struggle like a schoolboy.  Nor could I attack such a creature who had
but to twist my arm to break it.  Nothing remained but to stand still and
accept the indignity.  I had time to notice that the pockets of the dead
man had been emptied on the deck, and that his body and his grin had been
wrapped from view in canvas, the folds of which the sailor, Johansen, was
sewing together with coarse white twine, shoving the needle through with
a leather contrivance fitted on the palm of his hand.

Wolf Larsen dropped my hand with a flirt of disdain.

“Dead men’s hands have kept it soft.  Good for little else than
dish-washing and scullion work.”

“I wish to be put ashore,” I said firmly, for I now had myself in
control.  “I shall pay you whatever you judge your delay and trouble to
be worth.”

He looked at me curiously.  Mockery shone in his eyes.

“I have a counter proposition to make, and for the good of your soul.  My
mate’s gone, and there’ll be a lot of promotion.  A sailor comes aft to
take mate’s place, cabin-boy goes for’ard to take sailor’s place, and you
take the cabin-boy’s place, sign the articles for the cruise, twenty
dollars per month and found.  Now what do you say?  And mind you, it’s
for your own soul’s sake.  It will be the making of you.  You might learn
in time to stand on your own legs, and perhaps to toddle along a bit.”

But I took no notice.  The sails of the vessel I had seen off to the
south-west had grown larger and plainer.  They were of the same
schooner-rig as the _Ghost_, though the hull itself, I could see, was
smaller.  She was a pretty sight, leaping and flying toward us, and
evidently bound to pass at close range.  The wind had been momentarily
increasing, and the sun, after a few angry gleams, had disappeared.  The
sea had turned a dull leaden grey and grown rougher, and was now tossing
foaming whitecaps to the sky.  We were travelling faster, and heeled
farther over.  Once, in a gust, the rail dipped under the sea, and the
decks on that side were for the moment awash with water that made a
couple of the hunters hastily lift their feet.

“That vessel will soon be passing us,” I said, after a moment’s pause.
“As she is going in the opposite direction, she is very probably bound
for San Francisco.”

“Very probably,” was Wolf Larsen’s answer, as he turned partly away from
me and cried out, “Cooky!  Oh, Cooky!”

The Cockney popped out of the galley.

“Where’s that boy?  Tell him I want him.”

“Yes, sir;” and Thomas Mugridge fled swiftly aft and disappeared down
another companion-way near the wheel.  A moment later he emerged, a
heavy-set young fellow of eighteen or nineteen, with a glowering,
villainous countenance, trailing at his heels.

“’Ere ’e is, sir,” the cook said.

But Wolf Larsen ignored that worthy, turning at once to the cabin-boy.

“What’s your name, boy?”

“George Leach, sir,” came the sullen answer, and the boy’s bearing showed
clearly that he divined the reason for which he had been summoned.

“Not an Irish name,” the captain snapped sharply.  “O’Toole or McCarthy
would suit your mug a damn sight better.  Unless, very likely, there’s an
Irishman in your mother’s woodpile.”

I saw the young fellow’s hands clench at the insult, and the blood crawl
scarlet up his neck.

“But let that go,” Wolf Larsen continued.  “You may have very good
reasons for forgetting your name, and I’ll like you none the worse for it
as long as you toe the mark.  Telegraph Hill, of course, is your port of
entry.  It sticks out all over your mug.  Tough as they make them and
twice as nasty.  I know the kind.  Well, you can make up your mind to
have it taken out of you on this craft.  Understand?  Who shipped you,
anyway?”

“McCready and Swanson.”

“Sir!” Wolf Larsen thundered.

“McCready and Swanson, sir,” the boy corrected, his eyes burning with a
bitter light.

“Who got the advance money?”

“They did, sir.”

“I thought as much.  And damned glad you were to let them have it.
Couldn’t make yourself scarce too quick, with several gentlemen you may
have heard of looking for you.”

The boy metamorphosed into a savage on the instant.  His body bunched
together as though for a spring, and his face became as an infuriated
beast’s as he snarled, “It’s a—”

“A what?” Wolf Larsen asked, a peculiar softness in his voice, as though
he were overwhelmingly curious to hear the unspoken word.

The boy hesitated, then mastered his temper.  “Nothin’, sir.  I take it
back.”

“And you have shown me I was right.”  This with a gratified smile.  “How
old are you?”

“Just turned sixteen, sir,”

“A lie.  You’ll never see eighteen again.  Big for your age at that, with
muscles like a horse.  Pack up your kit and go for’ard into the fo’c’sle.
You’re a boat-puller now.  You’re promoted; see?”

Without waiting for the boy’s acceptance, the captain turned to the
sailor who had just finished the gruesome task of sewing up the corpse.
“Johansen, do you know anything about navigation?”

“No, sir,”

“Well, never mind; you’re mate just the same.  Get your traps aft into
the mate’s berth.”

“Ay, ay, sir,” was the cheery response, as Johansen started forward.

In the meantime the erstwhile cabin-boy had not moved.  “What are you
waiting for?” Wolf Larsen demanded.

“I didn’t sign for boat-puller, sir,” was the reply.  “I signed for
cabin-boy.  An’ I don’t want no boat-pullin’ in mine.”

“Pack up and go for’ard.”

This time Wolf Larsen’s command was thrillingly imperative.  The boy
glowered sullenly, but refused to move.

Then came another stirring of Wolf Larsen’s tremendous strength.  It was
utterly unexpected, and it was over and done with between the ticks of
two seconds.  He had sprung fully six feet across the deck and driven his
fist into the other’s stomach.  At the same moment, as though I had been
struck myself, I felt a sickening shock in the pit of my stomach.  I
instance this to show the sensitiveness of my nervous organization at the
time, and how unused I was to spectacles of brutality.  The cabin-boy—and
he weighed one hundred and sixty-five at the very least—crumpled up.  His
body wrapped limply about the fist like a wet rag about a stick.  He
lifted into the air, described a short curve, and struck the deck
alongside the corpse on his head and shoulders, where he lay and writhed
about in agony.

“Well?” Larsen asked of me.  “Have you made up your mind?”

I had glanced occasionally at the approaching schooner, and it was now
almost abreast of us and not more than a couple of hundred yards away.
It was a very trim and neat little craft.  I could see a large, black
number on one of its sails, and I had seen pictures of pilot-boats.

“What vessel is that?” I asked.

“The pilot-boat _Lady Mine_,” Wolf Larsen answered grimly.  “Got rid of
her pilots and running into San Francisco.  She’ll be there in five or
six hours with this wind.”

“Will you please signal it, then, so that I may be put ashore.”

“Sorry, but I’ve lost the signal book overboard,” he remarked, and the
group of hunters grinned.

I debated a moment, looking him squarely in the eyes.  I had seen the
frightful treatment of the cabin-boy, and knew that I should very
probably receive the same, if not worse.  As I say, I debated with
myself, and then I did what I consider the bravest act of my life.  I ran
to the side, waving my arms and shouting:

“_Lady Mine_ ahoy!  Take me ashore!  A thousand dollars if you take me
ashore!”

I waited, watching two men who stood by the wheel, one of them steering.
The other was lifting a megaphone to his lips.  I did not turn my head,
though I expected every moment a killing blow from the human brute behind
me.  At last, after what seemed centuries, unable longer to stand the
strain, I looked around.  He had not moved.  He was standing in the same
position, swaying easily to the roll of the ship and lighting a fresh
cigar.

“What is the matter?  Anything wrong?”

This was the cry from the _Lady Mine_.

“Yes!” I shouted, at the top of my lungs.  “Life or death!  One thousand
dollars if you take me ashore!”

“Too much ’Frisco tanglefoot for the health of my crew!” Wolf Larsen
shouted after.  “This one”—indicating me with his thumb—“fancies
sea-serpents and monkeys just now!”

The man on the _Lady Mine_ laughed back through the megaphone.  The
pilot-boat plunged past.

“Give him hell for me!” came a final cry, and the two men waved their
arms in farewell.

I leaned despairingly over the rail, watching the trim little schooner
swiftly increasing the bleak sweep of ocean between us.  And she would
probably be in San Francisco in five or six hours!  My head seemed
bursting.  There was an ache in my throat as though my heart were up in
it.  A curling wave struck the side and splashed salt spray on my lips.
The wind puffed strongly, and the _Ghost_ heeled far over, burying her
lee rail.  I could hear the water rushing down upon the deck.

When I turned around, a moment later, I saw the cabin-boy staggering to
his feet.  His face was ghastly white, twitching with suppressed pain.
He looked very sick.

“Well, Leach, are you going for’ard?” Wolf Larsen asked.

“Yes, sir,” came the answer of a spirit cowed.

“And you?” I was asked.

“I’ll give you a thousand—” I began, but was interrupted.

“Stow that!  Are you going to take up your duties as cabin-boy?  Or do I
have to take you in hand?”

What was I to do?  To be brutally beaten, to be killed perhaps, would not
help my case.  I looked steadily into the cruel grey eyes.  They might
have been granite for all the light and warmth of a human soul they
contained.  One may see the soul stir in some men’s eyes, but his were
bleak, and cold, and grey as the sea itself.

“Well?”

“Yes,” I said.

“Say ‘yes, sir.’”

“Yes, sir,” I corrected.

“What is your name?”

“Van Weyden, sir.”

“First name?”

“Humphrey, sir; Humphrey Van Weyden.”

“Age?”

“Thirty-five, sir.”

“That’ll do.  Go to the cook and learn your duties.”

And thus it was that I passed into a state of involuntary servitude to
Wolf Larsen.  He was stronger than I, that was all.  But it was very
unreal at the time.  It is no less unreal now that I look back upon it.
It will always be to me a monstrous, inconceivable thing, a horrible
nightmare.

“Hold on, don’t go yet.”

I stopped obediently in my walk toward the galley.

“Johansen, call all hands.  Now that we’ve everything cleaned up, we’ll
have the funeral and get the decks cleared of useless lumber.”

While Johansen was summoning the watch below, a couple of sailors, under
the captain’s direction, laid the canvas-swathed corpse upon a
hatch-cover.  On either side the deck, against the rail and bottoms up,
were lashed a number of small boats.  Several men picked up the
hatch-cover with its ghastly freight, carried it to the lee side, and
rested it on the boats, the feet pointing overboard.  To the feet was
attached the sack of coal which the cook had fetched.

I had always conceived a burial at sea to be a very solemn and
awe-inspiring event, but I was quickly disillusioned, by this burial at
any rate.  One of the hunters, a little dark-eyed man whom his mates
called “Smoke,” was telling stories, liberally intersprinkled with oaths
and obscenities; and every minute or so the group of hunters gave mouth
to a laughter that sounded to me like a wolf-chorus or the barking of
hell-hounds.  The sailors trooped noisily aft, some of the watch below
rubbing the sleep from their eyes, and talked in low tones together.
There was an ominous and worried expression on their faces.  It was
evident that they did not like the outlook of a voyage under such a
captain and begun so inauspiciously.  From time to time they stole
glances at Wolf Larsen, and I could see that they were apprehensive of
the man.

He stepped up to the hatch-cover, and all caps came off.  I ran my eyes
over them—twenty men all told; twenty-two including the man at the wheel
and myself.  I was pardonably curious in my survey, for it appeared my
fate to be pent up with them on this miniature floating world for I knew
not how many weeks or months.  The sailors, in the main, were English and
Scandinavian, and their faces seemed of the heavy, stolid order.  The
hunters, on the other hand, had stronger and more diversified faces, with
hard lines and the marks of the free play of passions.  Strange to say,
and I noted it all once, Wolf Larsen’s features showed no such evil
stamp.  There seemed nothing vicious in them.  True, there were lines,
but they were the lines of decision and firmness.  It seemed, rather, a
frank and open countenance, which frankness or openness was enhanced by
the fact that he was smooth-shaven.  I could hardly believe—until the
next incident occurred—that it was the face of a man who could behave as
he had behaved to the cabin-boy.

At this moment, as he opened his mouth to speak, puff after puff struck
the schooner and pressed her side under.  The wind shrieked a wild song
through the rigging.  Some of the hunters glanced anxiously aloft.  The
lee rail, where the dead man lay, was buried in the sea, and as the
schooner lifted and righted the water swept across the deck wetting us
above our shoe-tops.  A shower of rain drove down upon us, each drop
stinging like a hailstone.  As it passed, Wolf Larsen began to speak, the
bare-headed men swaying in unison, to the heave and lunge of the deck.

“I only remember one part of the service,” he said, “and that is, ‘And
the body shall be cast into the sea.’  So cast it in.”

He ceased speaking.  The men holding the hatch-cover seemed perplexed,
puzzled no doubt by the briefness of the ceremony.  He burst upon them in
a fury.

“Lift up that end there, damn you!  What the hell’s the matter with you?”

They elevated the end of the hatch-cover with pitiful haste, and, like a
dog flung overside, the dead man slid feet first into the sea.  The coal
at his feet dragged him down.  He was gone.

“Johansen,” Wolf Larsen said briskly to the new mate, “keep all hands on
deck now they’re here.  Get in the topsails and jibs and make a good job
of it.  We’re in for a sou’-easter.  Better reef the jib and mainsail
too, while you’re about it.”

In a moment the decks were in commotion, Johansen bellowing orders and
the men pulling or letting go ropes of various sorts—all naturally
confusing to a landsman such as myself.  But it was the heartlessness of
it that especially struck me.  The dead man was an episode that was past,
an incident that was dropped, in a canvas covering with a sack of coal,
while the ship sped along and her work went on.  Nobody had been
affected.  The hunters were laughing at a fresh story of Smoke’s; the men
pulling and hauling, and two of them climbing aloft; Wolf Larsen was
studying the clouding sky to windward; and the dead man, dying obscenely,
buried sordidly, and sinking down, down—

Then it was that the cruelty of the sea, its relentlessness and
awfulness, rushed upon me.  Life had become cheap and tawdry, a beastly
and inarticulate thing, a soulless stirring of the ooze and slime.  I
held on to the weather rail, close by the shrouds, and gazed out across
the desolate foaming waves to the low-lying fog-banks that hid San
Francisco and the California coast.  Rain-squalls were driving in
between, and I could scarcely see the fog.  And this strange vessel, with
its terrible men, pressed under by wind and sea and ever leaping up and
out, was heading away into the south-west, into the great and lonely
Pacific expanse.




CHAPTER IV


What happened to me next on the sealing-schooner _Ghost_, as I strove to
fit into my new environment, are matters of humiliation and pain.  The
cook, who was called “the doctor” by the crew, “Tommy” by the hunters,
and “Cooky” by Wolf Larsen, was a changed person.  The difference worked
in my status brought about a corresponding difference in treatment from
him.  Servile and fawning as he had been before, he was now as
domineering and bellicose.  In truth, I was no longer the fine gentleman
with a skin soft as a “lydy’s,” but only an ordinary and very worthless
cabin-boy.

He absurdly insisted upon my addressing him as Mr. Mugridge, and his
behaviour and carriage were insufferable as he showed me my duties.
Besides my work in the cabin, with its four small state-rooms, I was
supposed to be his assistant in the galley, and my colossal ignorance
concerning such things as peeling potatoes or washing greasy pots was a
source of unending and sarcastic wonder to him.  He refused to take into
consideration what I was, or, rather, what my life and the things I was
accustomed to had been.  This was part of the attitude he chose to adopt
toward me; and I confess, ere the day was done, that I hated him with
more lively feelings than I had ever hated any one in my life before.

This first day was made more difficult for me from the fact that the
_Ghost_, under close reefs (terms such as these I did not learn till
later), was plunging through what Mr. Mugridge called an “’owlin’
sou’-easter.”  At half-past five, under his directions, I set the table
in the cabin, with rough-weather trays in place, and then carried the tea
and cooked food down from the galley.  In this connection I cannot
forbear relating my first experience with a boarding sea.

“Look sharp or you’ll get doused,” was Mr. Mugridge’s parting injunction,
as I left the galley with a big tea-pot in one hand, and in the hollow of
the other arm several loaves of fresh-baked bread.  One of the hunters, a
tall, loose-jointed chap named Henderson, was going aft at the time from
the steerage (the name the hunters facetiously gave their midships
sleeping quarters) to the cabin.  Wolf Larsen was on the poop, smoking
his everlasting cigar.

“’Ere she comes.  Sling yer ’ook!” the cook cried.

I stopped, for I did not know what was coming, and saw the galley door
slide shut with a bang.  Then I saw Henderson leaping like a madman for
the main rigging, up which he shot, on the inside, till he was many feet
higher than my head.  Also I saw a great wave, curling and foaming,
poised far above the rail.  I was directly under it.  My mind did not
work quickly, everything was so new and strange.  I grasped that I was in
danger, but that was all.  I stood still, in trepidation.  Then Wolf
Larsen shouted from the poop:

“Grab hold something, you—you Hump!”

But it was too late.  I sprang toward the rigging, to which I might have
clung, and was met by the descending wall of water.  What happened after
that was very confusing.  I was beneath the water, suffocating and
drowning.  My feet were out from under me, and I was turning over and
over and being swept along I knew not where.  Several times I collided
against hard objects, once striking my right knee a terrible blow.  Then
the flood seemed suddenly to subside and I was breathing the good air
again.  I had been swept against the galley and around the steerage
companion-way from the weather side into the lee scuppers.  The pain from
my hurt knee was agonizing.  I could not put my weight on it, or, at
least, I thought I could not put my weight on it; and I felt sure the leg
was broken.  But the cook was after me, shouting through the lee galley
door:

“’Ere, you!  Don’t tyke all night about it!  Where’s the pot?  Lost
overboard?  Serve you bloody well right if yer neck was broke!”

I managed to struggle to my feet.  The great tea-pot was still in my
hand.  I limped to the galley and handed it to him.  But he was consumed
with indignation, real or feigned.

“Gawd blime me if you ayn’t a slob.  Wot ’re you good for anyw’y, I’d
like to know?  Eh?  Wot ’re you good for any’wy?  Cawn’t even carry a bit
of tea aft without losin’ it.  Now I’ll ’ave to boil some more.

“An’ wot ’re you snifflin’ about?” he burst out at me, with renewed rage.
“’Cos you’ve ’urt yer pore little leg, pore little mamma’s darlin’.”

I was not sniffling, though my face might well have been drawn and
twitching from the pain.  But I called up all my resolution, set my
teeth, and hobbled back and forth from galley to cabin and cabin to
galley without further mishap.  Two things I had acquired by my accident:
an injured knee-cap that went undressed and from which I suffered for
weary months, and the name of “Hump,” which Wolf Larsen had called me
from the poop.  Thereafter, fore and aft, I was known by no other name,
until the term became a part of my thought-processes and I identified it
with myself, thought of myself as Hump, as though Hump were I and had
always been I.

It was no easy task, waiting on the cabin table, where sat Wolf Larsen,
Johansen, and the six hunters.  The cabin was small, to begin with, and
to move around, as I was compelled to, was not made easier by the
schooner’s violent pitching and wallowing.  But what struck me most
forcibly was the total lack of sympathy on the part of the men whom I
served.  I could feel my knee through my clothes, swelling, and swelling,
and I was sick and faint from the pain of it.  I could catch glimpses of
my face, white and ghastly, distorted with pain, in the cabin mirror.
All the men must have seen my condition, but not one spoke or took notice
of me, till I was almost grateful to Wolf Larsen, later on (I was washing
the dishes), when he said:

“Don’t let a little thing like that bother you.  You’ll get used to such
things in time.  It may cripple you some, but all the same you’ll be
learning to walk.

“That’s what you call a paradox, isn’t it?” he added.

He seemed pleased when I nodded my head with the customary “Yes, sir.”

“I suppose you know a bit about literary things?  Eh?  Good.  I’ll have
some talks with you some time.”

And then, taking no further account of me, he turned his back and went up
on deck.

That night, when I had finished an endless amount of work, I was sent to
sleep in the steerage, where I made up a spare bunk.  I was glad to get
out of the detestable presence of the cook and to be off my feet.  To my
surprise, my clothes had dried on me and there seemed no indications of
catching cold, either from the last soaking or from the prolonged soaking
from the foundering of the _Martinez_.  Under ordinary circumstances,
after all that I had undergone, I should have been fit for bed and a
trained nurse.

But my knee was bothering me terribly.  As well as I could make out, the
kneecap seemed turned up on edge in the midst of the swelling.  As I sat
in my bunk examining it (the six hunters were all in the steerage,
smoking and talking in loud voices), Henderson took a passing glance at
it.

“Looks nasty,” he commented.  “Tie a rag around it, and it’ll be all
right.”

That was all; and on the land I would have been lying on the broad of my
back, with a surgeon attending on me, and with strict injunctions to do
nothing but rest.  But I must do these men justice.  Callous as they were
to my suffering, they were equally callous to their own when anything
befell them.  And this was due, I believe, first, to habit; and second,
to the fact that they were less sensitively organized.  I really believe
that a finely-organized, high-strung man would suffer twice and thrice as
much as they from a like injury.

Tired as I was,—exhausted, in fact,—I was prevented from sleeping by the
pain in my knee.  It was all I could do to keep from groaning aloud.  At
home I should undoubtedly have given vent to my anguish; but this new and
elemental environment seemed to call for a savage repression.  Like the
savage, the attitude of these men was stoical in great things, childish
in little things.  I remember, later in the voyage, seeing Kerfoot,
another of the hunters, lose a finger by having it smashed to a jelly;
and he did not even murmur or change the expression on his face.  Yet I
have seen the same man, time and again, fly into the most outrageous
passion over a trifle.

He was doing it now, vociferating, bellowing, waving his arms, and
cursing like a fiend, and all because of a disagreement with another
hunter as to whether a seal pup knew instinctively how to swim.  He held
that it did, that it could swim the moment it was born.  The other
hunter, Latimer, a lean, Yankee-looking fellow with shrewd,
narrow-slitted eyes, held otherwise, held that the seal pup was born on
the land for no other reason than that it could not swim, that its mother
was compelled to teach it to swim as birds were compelled to teach their
nestlings how to fly.

For the most part, the remaining four hunters leaned on the table or lay
in their bunks and left the discussion to the two antagonists.  But they
were supremely interested, for every little while they ardently took
sides, and sometimes all were talking at once, till their voices surged
back and forth in waves of sound like mimic thunder-rolls in the confined
space.  Childish and immaterial as the topic was, the quality of their
reasoning was still more childish and immaterial.  In truth, there was
very little reasoning or none at all.  Their method was one of assertion,
assumption, and denunciation.  They proved that a seal pup could swim or
not swim at birth by stating the proposition very bellicosely and then
following it up with an attack on the opposing man’s judgment, common
sense, nationality, or past history.  Rebuttal was precisely similar.  I
have related this in order to show the mental calibre of the men with
whom I was thrown in contact.  Intellectually they were children,
inhabiting the physical forms of men.

And they smoked, incessantly smoked, using a coarse, cheap, and
offensive-smelling tobacco.  The air was thick and murky with the smoke
of it; and this, combined with the violent movement of the ship as she
struggled through the storm, would surely have made me sea-sick had I
been a victim to that malady.  As it was, it made me quite squeamish,
though this nausea might have been due to the pain of my leg and
exhaustion.

As I lay there thinking, I naturally dwelt upon myself and my situation.
It was unparalleled, undreamed-of, that I, Humphrey Van Weyden, a scholar
and a dilettante, if you please, in things artistic and literary, should
be lying here on a Bering Sea seal-hunting schooner.  Cabin-boy!  I had
never done any hard manual labour, or scullion labour, in my life.  I had
lived a placid, uneventful, sedentary existence all my days—the life of a
scholar and a recluse on an assured and comfortable income.  Violent life
and athletic sports had never appealed to me.  I had always been a
book-worm; so my sisters and father had called me during my childhood.  I
had gone camping but once in my life, and then I left the party almost at
its start and returned to the comforts and conveniences of a roof.  And
here I was, with dreary and endless vistas before me of table-setting,
potato-peeling, and dish-washing.  And I was not strong.  The doctors had
always said that I had a remarkable constitution, but I had never
developed it or my body through exercise.  My muscles were small and
soft, like a woman’s, or so the doctors had said time and again in the
course of their attempts to persuade me to go in for physical-culture
fads.  But I had preferred to use my head rather than my body; and here I
was, in no fit condition for the rough life in prospect.

These are merely a few of the things that went through my mind, and are
related for the sake of vindicating myself in advance in the weak and
helpless _rôle_ I was destined to play.  But I thought, also, of my
mother and sisters, and pictured their grief.  I was among the missing
dead of the _Martinez_ disaster, an unrecovered body.  I could see the
head-lines in the papers; the fellows at the University Club and the
Bibelot shaking their heads and saying, “Poor chap!”  And I could see
Charley Furuseth, as I had said good-bye to him that morning, lounging in
a dressing-gown on the be-pillowed window couch and delivering himself of
oracular and pessimistic epigrams.

And all the while, rolling, plunging, climbing the moving mountains and
falling and wallowing in the foaming valleys, the schooner _Ghost_ was
fighting her way farther and farther into the heart of the Pacific—and I
was on her.  I could hear the wind above.  It came to my ears as a
muffled roar.  Now and again feet stamped overhead.  An endless creaking
was going on all about me, the woodwork and the fittings groaning and
squeaking and complaining in a thousand keys.  The hunters were still
arguing and roaring like some semi-human amphibious breed.  The air was
filled with oaths and indecent expressions.  I could see their faces,
flushed and angry, the brutality distorted and emphasized by the sickly
yellow of the sea-lamps which rocked back and forth with the ship.
Through the dim smoke-haze the bunks looked like the sleeping dens of
animals in a menagerie.  Oilskins and sea-boots were hanging from the
walls, and here and there rifles and shotguns rested securely in the
racks.  It was a sea-fitting for the buccaneers and pirates of by-gone
years.  My imagination ran riot, and still I could not sleep.  And it was
a long, long night, weary and dreary and long.




CHAPTER V


But my first night in the hunters’ steerage was also my last.  Next day
Johansen, the new mate, was routed from the cabin by Wolf Larsen, and
sent into the steerage to sleep thereafter, while I took possession of
the tiny cabin state-room, which, on the first day of the voyage, had
already had two occupants.  The reason for this change was quickly
learned by the hunters, and became the cause of a deal of grumbling on
their part.  It seemed that Johansen, in his sleep, lived over each night
the events of the day.  His incessant talking and shouting and bellowing
of orders had been too much for Wolf Larsen, who had accordingly foisted
the nuisance upon his hunters.

After a sleepless night, I arose weak and in agony, to hobble through my
second day on the _Ghost_.  Thomas Mugridge routed me out at half-past
five, much in the fashion that Bill Sykes must have routed out his dog;
but Mr. Mugridge’s brutality to me was paid back in kind and with
interest.  The unnecessary noise he made (I had lain wide-eyed the whole
night) must have awakened one of the hunters; for a heavy shoe whizzed
through the semi-darkness, and Mr. Mugridge, with a sharp howl of pain,
humbly begged everybody’s pardon.  Later on, in the galley, I noticed
that his ear was bruised and swollen.  It never went entirely back to its
normal shape, and was called a “cauliflower ear” by the sailors.

The day was filled with miserable variety.  I had taken my dried clothes
down from the galley the night before, and the first thing I did was to
exchange the cook’s garments for them.  I looked for my purse.  In
addition to some small change (and I have a good memory for such things),
it had contained one hundred and eighty-five dollars in gold and paper.
The purse I found, but its contents, with the exception of the small
silver, had been abstracted.  I spoke to the cook about it, when I went
on deck to take up my duties in the galley, and though I had looked
forward to a surly answer, I had not expected the belligerent harangue
that I received.

“Look ’ere, ’Ump,” he began, a malicious light in his eyes and a snarl in
his throat; “d’ye want yer nose punched?  If you think I’m a thief, just
keep it to yerself, or you’ll find ’ow bloody well mistyken you are.
Strike me blind if this ayn’t gratitude for yer!  ’Ere you come, a pore
mis’rable specimen of ’uman scum, an’ I tykes yer into my galley an’
treats yer ’ansom, an’ this is wot I get for it.  Nex’ time you can go to
’ell, say I, an’ I’ve a good mind to give you what-for anyw’y.”

So saying, he put up his fists and started for me.  To my shame be it, I
cowered away from the blow and ran out the galley door.  What else was I
to do?  Force, nothing but force, obtained on this brute-ship.  Moral
suasion was a thing unknown.  Picture it to yourself: a man of ordinary
stature, slender of build, and with weak, undeveloped muscles, who has
lived a peaceful, placid life, and is unused to violence of any sort—what
could such a man possibly do?  There was no more reason that I should
stand and face these human beasts than that I should stand and face an
infuriated bull.

So I thought it out at the time, feeling the need for vindication and
desiring to be at peace with my conscience.  But this vindication did not
satisfy.  Nor, to this day can I permit my manhood to look back upon
those events and feel entirely exonerated.  The situation was something
that really exceeded rational formulas for conduct and demanded more than
the cold conclusions of reason.  When viewed in the light of formal
logic, there is not one thing of which to be ashamed; but nevertheless a
shame rises within me at the recollection, and in the pride of my manhood
I feel that my manhood has in unaccountable ways been smirched and
sullied.

All of which is neither here nor there.  The speed with which I ran from
the galley caused excruciating pain in my knee, and I sank down
helplessly at the break of the poop.  But the Cockney had not pursued me.

“Look at ’im run!  Look at ’im run!” I could hear him crying.  “An’ with
a gyme leg at that!  Come on back, you pore little mamma’s darling.  I
won’t ’it yer; no, I won’t.”

I came back and went on with my work; and here the episode ended for the
time, though further developments were yet to take place.  I set the
breakfast-table in the cabin, and at seven o’clock waited on the hunters
and officers.  The storm had evidently broken during the night, though a
huge sea was still running and a stiff wind blowing.  Sail had been made
in the early watches, so that the _Ghost_ was racing along under
everything except the two topsails and the flying jib.  These three
sails, I gathered from the conversation, were to be set immediately after
breakfast.  I learned, also, that Wolf Larsen was anxious to make the
most of the storm, which was driving him to the south-west into that
portion of the sea where he expected to pick up with the north-east
trades.  It was before this steady wind that he hoped to make the major
portion of the run to Japan, curving south into the tropics and north
again as he approached the coast of Asia.

After breakfast I had another unenviable experience.  When I had finished
washing the dishes, I cleaned the cabin stove and carried the ashes up on
deck to empty them.  Wolf Larsen and Henderson were standing near the
wheel, deep in conversation.  The sailor, Johnson, was steering.  As I
started toward the weather side I saw him make a sudden motion with his
head, which I mistook for a token of recognition and good-morning.  In
reality, he was attempting to warn me to throw my ashes over the lee
side.  Unconscious of my blunder, I passed by Wolf Larsen and the hunter
and flung the ashes over the side to windward.  The wind drove them back,
and not only over me, but over Henderson and Wolf Larsen.  The next
instant the latter kicked me, violently, as a cur is kicked.  I had not
realized there could be so much pain in a kick.  I reeled away from him
and leaned against the cabin in a half-fainting condition.  Everything
was swimming before my eyes, and I turned sick.  The nausea overpowered
me, and I managed to crawl to the side of the vessel.  But Wolf Larsen
did not follow me up.  Brushing the ashes from his clothes, he had
resumed his conversation with Henderson.  Johansen, who had seen the
affair from the break of the poop, sent a couple of sailors aft to clean
up the mess.

Later in the morning I received a surprise of a totally different sort.
Following the cook’s instructions, I had gone into Wolf Larsen’s
state-room to put it to rights and make the bed.  Against the wall, near
the head of the bunk, was a rack filled with books.  I glanced over them,
noting with astonishment such names as Shakespeare, Tennyson, Poe, and De
Quincey.  There were scientific works, too, among which were represented
men such as Tyndall, Proctor, and Darwin.  Astronomy and physics were
represented, and I remarked Bulfinch’s _Age of Fable_, Shaw’s _History of
English and American Literature_, and Johnson’s _Natural History_ in two
large volumes.  Then there were a number of grammars, such as Metcalf’s,
and Reed and Kellogg’s; and I smiled as I saw a copy of _The Dean’s
English_.

I could not reconcile these books with the man from what I had seen of
him, and I wondered if he could possibly read them.  But when I came to
make the bed I found, between the blankets, dropped apparently as he had
sunk off to sleep, a complete Browning, the Cambridge Edition.  It was
open at “In a Balcony,” and I noticed, here and there, passages
underlined in pencil.  Further, letting drop the volume during a lurch of
the ship, a sheet of paper fell out.  It was scrawled over with
geometrical diagrams and calculations of some sort.

It was patent that this terrible man was no ignorant clod, such as one
would inevitably suppose him to be from his exhibitions of brutality.  At
once he became an enigma.  One side or the other of his nature was
perfectly comprehensible; but both sides together were bewildering.  I
had already remarked that his language was excellent, marred with an
occasional slight inaccuracy.  Of course, in common speech with the
sailors and hunters, it sometimes fairly bristled with errors, which was
due to the vernacular itself; but in the few words he had held with me it
had been clear and correct.

This glimpse I had caught of his other side must have emboldened me, for
I resolved to speak to him about the money I had lost.

“I have been robbed,” I said to him, a little later, when I found him
pacing up and down the poop alone.

“Sir,” he corrected, not harshly, but sternly.

“I have been robbed, sir,” I amended.

“How did it happen?” he asked.

Then I told him the whole circumstance, how my clothes had been left to
dry in the galley, and how, later, I was nearly beaten by the cook when I
mentioned the matter.

He smiled at my recital.  “Pickings,” he concluded; “Cooky’s pickings.
And don’t you think your miserable life worth the price?  Besides,
consider it a lesson.  You’ll learn in time how to take care of your
money for yourself.  I suppose, up to now, your lawyer has done it for
you, or your business agent.”

I could feel the quiet sneer through his words, but demanded, “How can I
get it back again?”

“That’s your look-out.  You haven’t any lawyer or business agent now, so
you’ll have to depend on yourself.  When you get a dollar, hang on to it.
A man who leaves his money lying around, the way you did, deserves to
lose it.  Besides, you have sinned.  You have no right to put temptation
in the way of your fellow-creatures.  You tempted Cooky, and he fell.
You have placed his immortal soul in jeopardy.  By the way, do you
believe in the immortal soul?”

His lids lifted lazily as he asked the question, and it seemed that the
deeps were opening to me and that I was gazing into his soul.  But it was
an illusion.  Far as it might have seemed, no man has ever seen very far
into Wolf Larsen’s soul, or seen it at all,—of this I am convinced.  It
was a very lonely soul, I was to learn, that never unmasked, though at
rare moments it played at doing so.

“I read immortality in your eyes,” I answered, dropping the “sir,”—an
experiment, for I thought the intimacy of the conversation warranted it.

He took no notice.  “By that, I take it, you see something that is alive,
but that necessarily does not have to live for ever.”

“I read more than that,” I continued boldly.

“Then you read consciousness.  You read the consciousness of life that it
is alive; but still no further away, no endlessness of life.”

How clearly he thought, and how well he expressed what he thought!  From
regarding me curiously, he turned his head and glanced out over the
leaden sea to windward.  A bleakness came into his eyes, and the lines of
his mouth grew severe and harsh.  He was evidently in a pessimistic mood.

“Then to what end?” he demanded abruptly, turning back to me.  “If I am
immortal—why?”

I halted.  How could I explain my idealism to this man?  How could I put
into speech a something felt, a something like the strains of music heard
in sleep, a something that convinced yet transcended utterance?

“What do you believe, then?” I countered.

“I believe that life is a mess,” he answered promptly.  “It is like
yeast, a ferment, a thing that moves and may move for a minute, an hour,
a year, or a hundred years, but that in the end will cease to move.  The
big eat the little that they may continue to move, the strong eat the
weak that they may retain their strength.  The lucky eat the most and
move the longest, that is all.  What do you make of those things?”

He swept his arm in an impatient gesture toward a number of the sailors
who were working on some kind of rope stuff amidships.

“They move, so does the jelly-fish move.  They move in order to eat in
order that they may keep moving.  There you have it.  They live for their
belly’s sake, and the belly is for their sake.  It’s a circle; you get
nowhere.  Neither do they.  In the end they come to a standstill.  They
move no more.  They are dead.”

“They have dreams,” I interrupted, “radiant, flashing dreams—”

“Of grub,” he concluded sententiously.

“And of more—”

“Grub.  Of a larger appetite and more luck in satisfying it.”  His voice
sounded harsh.  There was no levity in it.  “For, look you, they dream of
making lucky voyages which will bring them more money, of becoming the
mates of ships, of finding fortunes—in short, of being in a better
position for preying on their fellows, of having all night in, good grub
and somebody else to do the dirty work.  You and I are just like them.
There is no difference, except that we have eaten more and better.  I am
eating them now, and you too.  But in the past you have eaten more than I
have.  You have slept in soft beds, and worn fine clothes, and eaten good
meals.  Who made those beds? and those clothes? and those meals?  Not
you.  You never made anything in your own sweat.  You live on an income
which your father earned.  You are like a frigate bird swooping down upon
the boobies and robbing them of the fish they have caught.  You are one
with a crowd of men who have made what they call a government, who are
masters of all the other men, and who eat the food the other men get and
would like to eat themselves.  You wear the warm clothes.  They made the
clothes, but they shiver in rags and ask you, the lawyer, or business
agent who handles your money, for a job.”

“But that is beside the matter,” I cried.

“Not at all.”  He was speaking rapidly now, and his eyes were flashing.
“It is piggishness, and it is life.  Of what use or sense is an
immortality of piggishness?  What is the end?  What is it all about?  You
have made no food.  Yet the food you have eaten or wasted might have
saved the lives of a score of wretches who made the food but did not eat
it.  What immortal end did you serve? or did they?  Consider yourself and
me.  What does your boasted immortality amount to when your life runs
foul of mine?  You would like to go back to the land, which is a
favourable place for your kind of piggishness.  It is a whim of mine to
keep you aboard this ship, where my piggishness flourishes.  And keep you
I will.  I may make or break you.  You may die to-day, this week, or next
month.  I could kill you now, with a blow of my fist, for you are a
miserable weakling.  But if we are immortal, what is the reason for this?
To be piggish as you and I have been all our lives does not seem to be
just the thing for immortals to be doing.  Again, what’s it all about?
Why have I kept you here?—”

“Because you are stronger,” I managed to blurt out.

“But why stronger?” he went on at once with his perpetual queries.
“Because I am a bigger bit of the ferment than you?  Don’t you see?
Don’t you see?”

“But the hopelessness of it,” I protested.

“I agree with you,” he answered.  “Then why move at all, since moving is
living?  Without moving and being part of the yeast there would be no
hopelessness.  But,—and there it is,—we want to live and move, though we
have no reason to, because it happens that it is the nature of life to
live and move, to want to live and move.  If it were not for this, life
would be dead.  It is because of this life that is in you that you dream
of your immortality.  The life that is in you is alive and wants to go on
being alive for ever.  Bah!  An eternity of piggishness!”

He abruptly turned on his heel and started forward.  He stopped at the
break of the poop and called me to him.

“By the way, how much was it that Cooky got away with?” he asked.

“One hundred and eighty-five dollars, sir,” I answered.

He nodded his head.  A moment later, as I started down the companion
stairs to lay the table for dinner, I heard him loudly cursing some men
amidships.




CHAPTER VI


By the following morning the storm had blown itself quite out and the
_Ghost_ was rolling slightly on a calm sea without a breath of wind.
Occasional light airs were felt, however, and Wolf Larsen patrolled the
poop constantly, his eyes ever searching the sea to the north-eastward,
from which direction the great trade-wind must blow.

The men were all on deck and busy preparing their various boats for the
season’s hunting.  There are seven boats aboard, the captain’s dingey,
and the six which the hunters will use.  Three, a hunter, a boat-puller,
and a boat-steerer, compose a boat’s crew.  On board the schooner the
boat-pullers and steerers are the crew.  The hunters, too, are supposed
to be in command of the watches, subject, always, to the orders of Wolf
Larsen.

All this, and more, I have learned.  The _Ghost_ is considered the
fastest schooner in both the San Francisco and Victoria fleets.  In fact,
she was once a private yacht, and was built for speed.  Her lines and
fittings—though I know nothing about such things—speak for themselves.
Johnson was telling me about her in a short chat I had with him during
yesterday’s second dog-watch.  He spoke enthusiastically, with the love
for a fine craft such as some men feel for horses.  He is greatly
disgusted with the outlook, and I am given to understand that Wolf Larsen
bears a very unsavoury reputation among the sealing captains.  It was the
_Ghost_ herself that lured Johnson into signing for the voyage, but he is
already beginning to repent.

As he told me, the _Ghost_ is an eighty-ton schooner of a remarkably fine
model.  Her beam, or width, is twenty-three feet, and her length a little
over ninety feet.  A lead keel of fabulous but unknown weight makes her
very stable, while she carries an immense spread of canvas.  From the
deck to the truck of the maintopmast is something over a hundred feet,
while the foremast with its topmast is eight or ten feet shorter.  I am
giving these details so that the size of this little floating world which
holds twenty-two men may be appreciated.  It is a very little world, a
mote, a speck, and I marvel that men should dare to venture the sea on a
contrivance so small and fragile.

Wolf Larsen has, also, a reputation for reckless carrying on of sail.  I
overheard Henderson and another of the hunters, Standish, a Californian,
talking about it.  Two years ago he dismasted the _Ghost_ in a gale on
Bering Sea, whereupon the present masts were put in, which are stronger
and heavier in every way.  He is said to have remarked, when he put them
in, that he preferred turning her over to losing the sticks.

Every man aboard, with the exception of Johansen, who is rather overcome
by his promotion, seems to have an excuse for having sailed on the
_Ghost_.  Half the men forward are deep-water sailors, and their excuse
is that they did not know anything about her or her captain.  And those
who do know, whisper that the hunters, while excellent shots, were so
notorious for their quarrelsome and rascally proclivities that they could
not sign on any decent schooner.

I have made the acquaintance of another one of the crew,—Louis he is
called, a rotund and jovial-faced Nova Scotia Irishman, and a very
sociable fellow, prone to talk as long as he can find a listener.  In the
afternoon, while the cook was below asleep and I was peeling the
everlasting potatoes, Louis dropped into the galley for a “yarn.”  His
excuse for being aboard was that he was drunk when he signed.  He assured
me again and again that it was the last thing in the world he would dream
of doing in a sober moment.  It seems that he has been seal-hunting
regularly each season for a dozen years, and is accounted one of the two
or three very best boat-steerers in both fleets.

“Ah, my boy,” he shook his head ominously at me, “’tis the worst schooner
ye could iv selected, nor were ye drunk at the time as was I.  ’Tis
sealin’ is the sailor’s paradise—on other ships than this.  The mate was
the first, but mark me words, there’ll be more dead men before the trip
is done with.  Hist, now, between you an’ meself and the stanchion there,
this Wolf Larsen is a regular devil, an’ the _Ghost’ll_ be a hell-ship
like she’s always ben since he had hold iv her.  Don’t I know?  Don’t I
know?  Don’t I remember him in Hakodate two years gone, when he had a row
an’ shot four iv his men?  Wasn’t I a-layin’ on the _Emma L._, not three
hundred yards away?  An’ there was a man the same year he killed with a
blow iv his fist.  Yes, sir, killed ’im dead-oh.  His head must iv
smashed like an eggshell.  An’ wasn’t there the Governor of Kura Island,
an’ the Chief iv Police, Japanese gentlemen, sir, an’ didn’t they come
aboard the _Ghost_ as his guests, a-bringin’ their wives along—wee an’
pretty little bits of things like you see ’em painted on fans.  An’ as he
was a-gettin’ under way, didn’t the fond husbands get left astern-like in
their sampan, as it might be by accident?  An’ wasn’t it a week later
that the poor little ladies was put ashore on the other side of the
island, with nothin’ before ’em but to walk home acrost the mountains on
their weeny-teeny little straw sandals which wouldn’t hang together a
mile?  Don’t I know?  ’Tis the beast he is, this Wolf Larsen—the great
big beast mentioned iv in Revelation; an’ no good end will he ever come
to.  But I’ve said nothin’ to ye, mind ye.  I’ve whispered never a word;
for old fat Louis’ll live the voyage out if the last mother’s son of yez
go to the fishes.”

“Wolf Larsen!” he snorted a moment later.  “Listen to the word, will ye!
Wolf—’tis what he is.  He’s not black-hearted like some men.  ’Tis no
heart he has at all.  Wolf, just wolf, ’tis what he is.  D’ye wonder he’s
well named?”

“But if he is so well-known for what he is,” I queried, “how is it that
he can get men to ship with him?”

“An’ how is it ye can get men to do anything on God’s earth an’ sea?”
Louis demanded with Celtic fire.  “How d’ye find me aboard if ’twasn’t
that I was drunk as a pig when I put me name down?  There’s them that
can’t sail with better men, like the hunters, and them that don’t know,
like the poor devils of wind-jammers for’ard there.  But they’ll come to
it, they’ll come to it, an’ be sorry the day they was born.  I could weep
for the poor creatures, did I but forget poor old fat Louis and the
troubles before him.  But ’tis not a whisper I’ve dropped, mind ye, not a
whisper.”

“Them hunters is the wicked boys,” he broke forth again, for he suffered
from a constitutional plethora of speech.  “But wait till they get to
cutting up iv jinks and rowin’ ’round.  He’s the boy’ll fix ’em.  ’Tis
him that’ll put the fear of God in their rotten black hearts.  Look at
that hunter iv mine, Horner.  ‘Jock’ Horner they call him, so quiet-like
an’ easy-goin’, soft-spoken as a girl, till ye’d think butter wouldn’t
melt in the mouth iv him.  Didn’t he kill his boat-steerer last year?
’Twas called a sad accident, but I met the boat-puller in Yokohama an’
the straight iv it was given me.  An’ there’s Smoke, the black little
devil—didn’t the Roosians have him for three years in the salt mines of
Siberia, for poachin’ on Copper Island, which is a Roosian preserve?
Shackled he was, hand an’ foot, with his mate.  An’ didn’t they have
words or a ruction of some kind?—for ’twas the other fellow Smoke sent up
in the buckets to the top of the mine; an’ a piece at a time he went up,
a leg to-day, an’ to-morrow an arm, the next day the head, an’ so on.”

“But you can’t mean it!” I cried out, overcome with the horror of it.

“Mean what!” he demanded, quick as a flash.  “’Tis nothin’ I’ve said.
Deef I am, and dumb, as ye should be for the sake iv your mother; an’
never once have I opened me lips but to say fine things iv them an’ him,
God curse his soul, an’ may he rot in purgatory ten thousand years, and
then go down to the last an’ deepest hell iv all!”

Johnson, the man who had chafed me raw when I first came aboard, seemed
the least equivocal of the men forward or aft.  In fact, there was
nothing equivocal about him.  One was struck at once by his
straightforwardness and manliness, which, in turn, were tempered by a
modesty which might be mistaken for timidity.  But timid he was not.  He
seemed, rather, to have the courage of his convictions, the certainty of
his manhood.  It was this that made him protest, at the commencement of
our acquaintance, against being called Yonson.  And upon this, and him,
Louis passed judgment and prophecy.

“’Tis a fine chap, that squarehead Johnson we’ve for’ard with us,” he
said.  “The best sailorman in the fo’c’sle.  He’s my boat-puller.  But
it’s to trouble he’ll come with Wolf Larsen, as the sparks fly upward.
It’s meself that knows.  I can see it brewin’ an’ comin’ up like a storm
in the sky.  I’ve talked to him like a brother, but it’s little he sees
in takin’ in his lights or flyin’ false signals.  He grumbles out when
things don’t go to suit him, and there’ll be always some tell-tale
carryin’ word iv it aft to the Wolf.  The Wolf is strong, and it’s the
way of a wolf to hate strength, an’ strength it is he’ll see in
Johnson—no knucklin’ under, and a ‘Yes, sir, thank ye kindly, sir,’ for a
curse or a blow.  Oh, she’s a-comin’!  She’s a-comin’!  An’ God knows
where I’ll get another boat-puller!  What does the fool up an’ say, when
the old man calls him Yonson, but ‘Me name is Johnson, sir,’ an’ then
spells it out, letter for letter.  Ye should iv seen the old man’s face!
I thought he’d let drive at him on the spot.  He didn’t, but he will, an’
he’ll break that squarehead’s heart, or it’s little I know iv the ways iv
men on the ships iv the sea.”

Thomas Mugridge is becoming unendurable.  I am compelled to Mister him
and to Sir him with every speech.  One reason for this is that Wolf
Larsen seems to have taken a fancy to him.  It is an unprecedented thing,
I take it, for a captain to be chummy with the cook; but this is
certainly what Wolf Larsen is doing.  Two or three times he put his head
into the galley and chaffed Mugridge good-naturedly, and once, this
afternoon, he stood by the break of the poop and chatted with him for
fully fifteen minutes.  When it was over, and Mugridge was back in the
galley, he became greasily radiant, and went about his work, humming
coster songs in a nerve-racking and discordant falsetto.

“I always get along with the officers,” he remarked to me in a
confidential tone.  “I know the w’y, I do, to myke myself uppreci-yted.
There was my last skipper—w’y I thought nothin’ of droppin’ down in the
cabin for a little chat and a friendly glass.  ‘Mugridge,’ sez ’e to me,
‘Mugridge,’ sez ’e, ‘you’ve missed yer vokytion.’  ‘An’ ’ow’s that?’ sez
I.  ‘Yer should ’a been born a gentleman, an’ never ’ad to work for yer
livin’.’  God strike me dead, ’Ump, if that ayn’t wot ’e sez, an’ me
a-sittin’ there in ’is own cabin, jolly-like an’ comfortable, a-smokin’
’is cigars an’ drinkin’ ’is rum.”

This chitter-chatter drove me to distraction.  I never heard a voice I
hated so.  His oily, insinuating tones, his greasy smile and his
monstrous self-conceit grated on my nerves till sometimes I was all in a
tremble.  Positively, he was the most disgusting and loathsome person I
have ever met.  The filth of his cooking was indescribable; and, as he
cooked everything that was eaten aboard, I was compelled to select what I
ate with great circumspection, choosing from the least dirty of his
concoctions.

My hands bothered me a great deal, unused as they were to work.  The
nails were discoloured and black, while the skin was already grained with
dirt which even a scrubbing-brush could not remove.  Then blisters came,
in a painful and never-ending procession, and I had a great burn on my
forearm, acquired by losing my balance in a roll of the ship and pitching
against the galley stove.  Nor was my knee any better.  The swelling had
not gone down, and the cap was still up on edge.  Hobbling about on it
from morning till night was not helping it any.  What I needed was rest,
if it were ever to get well.

Rest!  I never before knew the meaning of the word.  I had been resting
all my life and did not know it.  But now, could I sit still for one
half-hour and do nothing, not even think, it would be the most
pleasurable thing in the world.  But it is a revelation, on the other
hand.  I shall be able to appreciate the lives of the working people
hereafter.  I did not dream that work was so terrible a thing.  From
half-past five in the morning till ten o’clock at night I am everybody’s
slave, with not one moment to myself, except such as I can steal near the
end of the second dog-watch.  Let me pause for a minute to look out over
the sea sparkling in the sun, or to gaze at a sailor going aloft to the
gaff-topsails, or running out the bowsprit, and I am sure to hear the
hateful voice, “’Ere, you, ’Ump, no sodgerin’.  I’ve got my peepers on
yer.”

There are signs of rampant bad temper in the steerage, and the gossip is
going around that Smoke and Henderson have had a fight.  Henderson seems
the best of the hunters, a slow-going fellow, and hard to rouse; but
roused he must have been, for Smoke had a bruised and discoloured eye,
and looked particularly vicious when he came into the cabin for supper.

A cruel thing happened just before supper, indicative of the callousness
and brutishness of these men.  There is one green hand in the crew,
Harrison by name, a clumsy-looking country boy, mastered, I imagine, by
the spirit of adventure, and making his first voyage.  In the light
baffling airs the schooner had been tacking about a great deal, at which
times the sails pass from one side to the other and a man is sent aloft
to shift over the fore-gaff-topsail.  In some way, when Harrison was
aloft, the sheet jammed in the block through which it runs at the end of
the gaff.  As I understood it, there were two ways of getting it
cleared,—first, by lowering the foresail, which was comparatively easy
and without danger; and second, by climbing out the peak-halyards to the
end of the gaff itself, an exceedingly hazardous performance.

Johansen called out to Harrison to go out the halyards.  It was patent to
everybody that the boy was afraid.  And well he might be, eighty feet
above the deck, to trust himself on those thin and jerking ropes.  Had
there been a steady breeze it would not have been so bad, but the _Ghost_
was rolling emptily in a long sea, and with each roll the canvas flapped
and boomed and the halyards slacked and jerked taut.  They were capable
of snapping a man off like a fly from a whip-lash.

Harrison heard the order and understood what was demanded of him, but
hesitated.  It was probably the first time he had been aloft in his life.
Johansen, who had caught the contagion of Wolf Larsen’s masterfulness,
burst out with a volley of abuse and curses.

“That’ll do, Johansen,” Wolf Larsen said brusquely.  “I’ll have you know
that I do the swearing on this ship.  If I need your assistance, I’ll
call you in.”

“Yes, sir,” the mate acknowledged submissively.

In the meantime Harrison had started out on the halyards.  I was looking
up from the galley door, and I could see him trembling, as if with ague,
in every limb.  He proceeded very slowly and cautiously, an inch at a
time.  Outlined against the clear blue of the sky, he had the appearance
of an enormous spider crawling along the tracery of its web.

It was a slight uphill climb, for the foresail peaked high; and the
halyards, running through various blocks on the gaff and mast, gave him
separate holds for hands and feet.  But the trouble lay in that the wind
was not strong enough nor steady enough to keep the sail full.  When he
was half-way out, the _Ghost_ took a long roll to windward and back again
into the hollow between two seas.  Harrison ceased his progress and held
on tightly.  Eighty feet beneath, I could see the agonized strain of his
muscles as he gripped for very life.  The sail emptied and the gaff swung
amid-ships.  The halyards slackened, and, though it all happened very
quickly, I could see them sag beneath the weight of his body.  Then the
gag swung to the side with an abrupt swiftness, the great sail boomed
like a cannon, and the three rows of reef-points slatted against the
canvas like a volley of rifles.  Harrison, clinging on, made the giddy
rush through the air.  This rush ceased abruptly.  The halyards became
instantly taut.  It was the snap of the whip.  His clutch was broken.
One hand was torn loose from its hold.  The other lingered desperately
for a moment, and followed.  His body pitched out and down, but in some
way he managed to save himself with his legs.  He was hanging by them,
head downward.  A quick effort brought his hands up to the halyards
again; but he was a long time regaining his former position, where he
hung, a pitiable object.

“I’ll bet he has no appetite for supper,” I heard Wolf Larsen’s voice,
which came to me from around the corner of the galley.  “Stand from
under, you, Johansen!  Watch out!  Here she comes!”

In truth, Harrison was very sick, as a person is sea-sick; and for a long
time he clung to his precarious perch without attempting to move.
Johansen, however, continued violently to urge him on to the completion
of his task.

“It is a shame,” I heard Johnson growling in painfully slow and correct
English.  He was standing by the main rigging, a few feet away from me.
“The boy is willing enough.  He will learn if he has a chance.  But this
is—”  He paused awhile, for the word “murder” was his final judgment.

“Hist, will ye!” Louis whispered to him, “For the love iv your mother
hold your mouth!”

But Johnson, looking on, still continued his grumbling.

“Look here,” the hunter Standish spoke to Wolf Larsen, “that’s my
boat-puller, and I don’t want to lose him.”

“That’s all right, Standish,” was the reply.  “He’s your boat-puller when
you’ve got him in the boat; but he’s my sailor when I have him aboard,
and I’ll do what I damn well please with him.”

“But that’s no reason—” Standish began in a torrent of speech.

“That’ll do, easy as she goes,” Wolf Larsen counselled back.  “I’ve told
you what’s what, and let it stop at that.  The man’s mine, and I’ll make
soup of him and eat it if I want to.”

There was an angry gleam in the hunter’s eye, but he turned on his heel
and entered the steerage companion-way, where he remained, looking
upward.  All hands were on deck now, and all eyes were aloft, where a
human life was at grapples with death.  The callousness of these men, to
whom industrial organization gave control of the lives of other men, was
appalling.  I, who had lived out of the whirl of the world, had never
dreamed that its work was carried on in such fashion.  Life had always
seemed a peculiarly sacred thing, but here it counted for nothing, was a
cipher in the arithmetic of commerce.  I must say, however, that the
sailors themselves were sympathetic, as instance the case of Johnson; but
the masters (the hunters and the captain) were heartlessly indifferent.
Even the protest of Standish arose out of the fact that he did not wish
to lose his boat-puller.  Had it been some other hunter’s boat-puller,
he, like them, would have been no more than amused.

But to return to Harrison.  It took Johansen, insulting and reviling the
poor wretch, fully ten minutes to get him started again.  A little later
he made the end of the gaff, where, astride the spar itself, he had a
better chance for holding on.  He cleared the sheet, and was free to
return, slightly downhill now, along the halyards to the mast.  But he
had lost his nerve.  Unsafe as was his present position, he was loath to
forsake it for the more unsafe position on the halyards.

He looked along the airy path he must traverse, and then down to the
deck.  His eyes were wide and staring, and he was trembling violently.  I
had never seen fear so strongly stamped upon a human face.  Johansen
called vainly for him to come down.  At any moment he was liable to be
snapped off the gaff, but he was helpless with fright.  Wolf Larsen,
walking up and down with Smoke and in conversation, took no more notice
of him, though he cried sharply, once, to the man at the wheel:

“You’re off your course, my man!  Be careful, unless you’re looking for
trouble!”

“Ay, ay, sir,” the helmsman responded, putting a couple of spokes down.

He had been guilty of running the _Ghost_ several points off her course
in order that what little wind there was should fill the foresail and
hold it steady.  He had striven to help the unfortunate Harrison at the
risk of incurring Wolf Larsen’s anger.

The time went by, and the suspense, to me, was terrible.  Thomas
Mugridge, on the other hand, considered it a laughable affair, and was
continually bobbing his head out the galley door to make jocose remarks.
How I hated him!  And how my hatred for him grew and grew, during that
fearful time, to cyclopean dimensions.  For the first time in my life I
experienced the desire to murder—“saw red,” as some of our picturesque
writers phrase it.  Life in general might still be sacred, but life in
the particular case of Thomas Mugridge had become very profane indeed.  I
was frightened when I became conscious that I was seeing red, and the
thought flashed through my mind: was I, too, becoming tainted by the
brutality of my environment?—I, who even in the most flagrant crimes had
denied the justice and righteousness of capital punishment?

Fully half-an-hour went by, and then I saw Johnson and Louis in some sort
of altercation.  It ended with Johnson flinging off Louis’s detaining arm
and starting forward.  He crossed the deck, sprang into the fore rigging,
and began to climb.  But the quick eye of Wolf Larsen caught him.

“Here, you, what are you up to?” he cried.

Johnson’s ascent was arrested.  He looked his captain in the eyes and
replied slowly:

“I am going to get that boy down.”

“You’ll get down out of that rigging, and damn lively about it!  D’ye
hear?  Get down!”

Johnson hesitated, but the long years of obedience to the masters of
ships overpowered him, and he dropped sullenly to the deck and went on
forward.

At half after five I went below to set the cabin table, but I hardly knew
what I did, for my eyes and my brain were filled with the vision of a
man, white-faced and trembling, comically like a bug, clinging to the
thrashing gaff.  At six o’clock, when I served supper, going on deck to
get the food from the galley, I saw Harrison, still in the same position.
The conversation at the table was of other things.  Nobody seemed
interested in the wantonly imperilled life.  But making an extra trip to
the galley a little later, I was gladdened by the sight of Harrison
staggering weakly from the rigging to the forecastle scuttle.  He had
finally summoned the courage to descend.

Before closing this incident, I must give a scrap of conversation I had
with Wolf Larsen in the cabin, while I was washing the dishes.

“You were looking squeamish this afternoon,” he began.  “What was the
matter?”

I could see that he knew what had made me possibly as sick as Harrison,
that he was trying to draw me, and I answered, “It was because of the
brutal treatment of that boy.”

He gave a short laugh.  “Like sea-sickness, I suppose.  Some men are
subject to it, and others are not.”

“Not so,” I objected.

“Just so,” he went on.  “The earth is as full of brutality as the sea is
full of motion.  And some men are made sick by the one, and some by the
other.  That’s the only reason.”

“But you, who make a mock of human life, don’t you place any value upon
it whatever?” I demanded.

“Value?  What value?”  He looked at me, and though his eyes were steady
and motionless, there seemed a cynical smile in them.  “What kind of
value?  How do you measure it?  Who values it?”

“I do,” I made answer.

“Then what is it worth to you?  Another man’s life, I mean.  Come now,
what is it worth?”

The value of life?  How could I put a tangible value upon it?  Somehow,
I, who have always had expression, lacked expression when with Wolf
Larsen.  I have since determined that a part of it was due to the man’s
personality, but that the greater part was due to his totally different
outlook.  Unlike other materialists I had met and with whom I had
something in common to start on, I had nothing in common with him.
Perhaps, also, it was the elemental simplicity of his mind that baffled
me.  He drove so directly to the core of the matter, divesting a question
always of all superfluous details, and with such an air of finality, that
I seemed to find myself struggling in deep water, with no footing under
me.  Value of life?  How could I answer the question on the spur of the
moment?  The sacredness of life I had accepted as axiomatic.  That it was
intrinsically valuable was a truism I had never questioned.  But when he
challenged the truism I was speechless.

“We were talking about this yesterday,” he said.  “I held that life was a
ferment, a yeasty something which devoured life that it might live, and
that living was merely successful piggishness.  Why, if there is anything
in supply and demand, life is the cheapest thing in the world.  There is
only so much water, so much earth, so much air; but the life that is
demanding to be born is limitless.  Nature is a spendthrift.  Look at the
fish and their millions of eggs.  For that matter, look at you and me.
In our loins are the possibilities of millions of lives.  Could we but
find time and opportunity and utilize the last bit and every bit of the
unborn life that is in us, we could become the fathers of nations and
populate continents.  Life?  Bah!  It has no value.  Of cheap things it
is the cheapest.  Everywhere it goes begging.  Nature spills it out with
a lavish hand.  Where there is room for one life, she sows a thousand
lives, and it’s life eats life till the strongest and most piggish life
is left.”

“You have read Darwin,” I said.  “But you read him misunderstandingly
when you conclude that the struggle for existence sanctions your wanton
destruction of life.”

He shrugged his shoulders.  “You know you only mean that in relation to
human life, for of the flesh and the fowl and the fish you destroy as
much as I or any other man.  And human life is in no wise different,
though you feel it is and think that you reason why it is.  Why should I
be parsimonious with this life which is cheap and without value?  There
are more sailors than there are ships on the sea for them, more workers
than there are factories or machines for them.  Why, you who live on the
land know that you house your poor people in the slums of cities and
loose famine and pestilence upon them, and that there still remain more
poor people, dying for want of a crust of bread and a bit of meat (which
is life destroyed), than you know what to do with.  Have you ever seen
the London dockers fighting like wild beasts for a chance to work?”

He started for the companion stairs, but turned his head for a final
word.  “Do you know the only value life has is what life puts upon
itself?  And it is of course over-estimated since it is of necessity
prejudiced in its own favour.  Take that man I had aloft.  He held on as
if he were a precious thing, a treasure beyond diamonds or rubies.  To
you?  No.  To me?  Not at all.  To himself?  Yes.  But I do not accept
his estimate.  He sadly overrates himself.  There is plenty more life
demanding to be born.  Had he fallen and dripped his brains upon the deck
like honey from the comb, there would have been no loss to the world.  He
was worth nothing to the world.  The supply is too large.  To himself
only was he of value, and to show how fictitious even this value was,
being dead he is unconscious that he has lost himself.  He alone rated
himself beyond diamonds and rubies.  Diamonds and rubies are gone, spread
out on the deck to be washed away by a bucket of sea-water, and he does
not even know that the diamonds and rubies are gone.  He does not lose
anything, for with the loss of himself he loses the knowledge of loss.
Don’t you see?  And what have you to say?”

“That you are at least consistent,” was all I could say, and I went on
washing the dishes.




CHAPTER VII


At last, after three days of variable winds, we have caught the
north-east trades.  I came on deck, after a good night’s rest in spite of
my poor knee, to find the _Ghost_ foaming along, wing-and-wing, and every
sail drawing except the jibs, with a fresh breeze astern.  Oh, the wonder
of the great trade-wind!  All day we sailed, and all night, and the next
day, and the next, day after day, the wind always astern and blowing
steadily and strong.  The schooner sailed herself.  There was no pulling
and hauling on sheets and tackles, no shifting of topsails, no work at
all for the sailors to do except to steer.  At night when the sun went
down, the sheets were slackened; in the morning, when they yielded up the
damp of the dew and relaxed, they were pulled tight again—and that was
all.

Ten knots, twelve knots, eleven knots, varying from time to time, is the
speed we are making.  And ever out of the north-east the brave wind
blows, driving us on our course two hundred and fifty miles between the
dawns.  It saddens me and gladdens me, the gait with which we are leaving
San Francisco behind and with which we are foaming down upon the tropics.
Each day grows perceptibly warmer.  In the second dog-watch the sailors
come on deck, stripped, and heave buckets of water upon one another from
overside.  Flying-fish are beginning to be seen, and during the night the
watch above scrambles over the deck in pursuit of those that fall aboard.
In the morning, Thomas Mugridge being duly bribed, the galley is
pleasantly areek with the odour of their frying; while dolphin meat is
served fore and aft on such occasions as Johnson catches the blazing
beauties from the bowsprit end.

Johnson seems to spend all his spare time there or aloft at the
crosstrees, watching the _Ghost_ cleaving the water under press of sail.
There is passion, adoration, in his eyes, and he goes about in a sort of
trance, gazing in ecstasy at the swelling sails, the foaming wake, and
the heave and the run of her over the liquid mountains that are moving
with us in stately procession.

The days and nights are “all a wonder and a wild delight,” and though I
have little time from my dreary work, I steal odd moments to gaze and
gaze at the unending glory of what I never dreamed the world possessed.
Above, the sky is stainless blue—blue as the sea itself, which under the
forefoot is of the colour and sheen of azure satin.  All around the
horizon are pale, fleecy clouds, never changing, never moving, like a
silver setting for the flawless turquoise sky.

I do not forget one night, when I should have been asleep, of lying on
the forecastle-head and gazing down at the spectral ripple of foam thrust
aside by the _Ghost’s_ forefoot.  It sounded like the gurgling of a brook
over mossy stones in some quiet dell, and the crooning song of it lured
me away and out of myself till I was no longer Hump the cabin-boy, nor
Van Weyden, the man who had dreamed away thirty-five years among books.
But a voice behind me, the unmistakable voice of Wolf Larsen, strong with
the invincible certitude of the man and mellow with appreciation of the
words he was quoting, aroused me.

   “‘O the blazing tropic night, when the wake’s a welt of light
      That holds the hot sky tame,
   And the steady forefoot snores through the planet-powdered floors
      Where the scared whale flukes in flame.
   Her plates are scarred by the sun, dear lass,
      And her ropes are taut with the dew,
   For we’re booming down on the old trail, our own trail, the out trail,
      We’re sagging south on the Long Trail—the trail that is always
   new.’”

“Eh, Hump?  How’s it strike you?” he asked, after the due pause which
words and setting demanded.

I looked into his face.  It was aglow with light, as the sea itself, and
the eyes were flashing in the starshine.

“It strikes me as remarkable, to say the least, that you should show
enthusiasm,” I answered coldly.

“Why, man, it’s living! it’s life!” he cried.

“Which is a cheap thing and without value.”  I flung his words at him.

He laughed, and it was the first time I had heard honest mirth in his
voice.

“Ah, I cannot get you to understand, cannot drive it into your head, what
a thing this life is.  Of course life is valueless, except to itself.
And I can tell you that my life is pretty valuable just now—to myself.
It is beyond price, which you will acknowledge is a terrific overrating,
but which I cannot help, for it is the life that is in me that makes the
rating.”

He appeared waiting for the words with which to express the thought that
was in him, and finally went on.

“Do you know, I am filled with a strange uplift; I feel as if all time
were echoing through me, as though all powers were mine.  I know truth,
divine good from evil, right from wrong.  My vision is clear and far.  I
could almost believe in God.  But,” and his voice changed and the light
went out of his face,—“what is this condition in which I find myself?
this joy of living? this exultation of life? this inspiration, I may well
call it?  It is what comes when there is nothing wrong with one’s
digestion, when his stomach is in trim and his appetite has an edge, and
all goes well.  It is the bribe for living, the champagne of the blood,
the effervescence of the ferment—that makes some men think holy thoughts,
and other men to see God or to create him when they cannot see him.  That
is all, the drunkenness of life, the stirring and crawling of the yeast,
the babbling of the life that is insane with consciousness that it is
alive.  And—bah!  To-morrow I shall pay for it as the drunkard pays.  And
I shall know that I must die, at sea most likely, cease crawling of
myself to be all a-crawl with the corruption of the sea; to be fed upon,
to be carrion, to yield up all the strength and movement of my muscles
that it may become strength and movement in fin and scale and the guts of
fishes.  Bah!  And bah! again.  The champagne is already flat.  The
sparkle and bubble has gone out and it is a tasteless drink.”

He left me as suddenly as he had come, springing to the deck with the
weight and softness of a tiger.  The _Ghost_ ploughed on her way.  I
noted the gurgling forefoot was very like a snore, and as I listened to
it the effect of Wolf Larsen’s swift rush from sublime exultation to
despair slowly left me.  Then some deep-water sailor, from the waist of
the ship, lifted a rich tenor voice in the “Song of the Trade Wind”:

   “Oh, I am the wind the seamen love—
      I am steady, and strong, and true;
   They follow my track by the clouds above,
      O’er the fathomless tropic blue.

                                  * * * * *

   Through daylight and dark I follow the bark
      I keep like a hound on her trail;
   I’m strongest at noon, yet under the moon,
      I stiffen the bunt of her sail.”




CHAPTER VIII


Sometimes I think Wolf Larsen mad, or half-mad at least, what of his
strange moods and vagaries.  At other times I take him for a great man, a
genius who has never arrived.  And, finally, I am convinced that he is
the perfect type of the primitive man, born a thousand years or
generations too late and an anachronism in this culminating century of
civilization.  He is certainly an individualist of the most pronounced
type.  Not only that, but he is very lonely.  There is no congeniality
between him and the rest of the men aboard ship.  His tremendous virility
and mental strength wall him apart.  They are more like children to him,
even the hunters, and as children he treats them, descending perforce to
their level and playing with them as a man plays with puppies.  Or else
he probes them with the cruel hand of a vivisectionist, groping about in
their mental processes and examining their souls as though to see of what
soul-stuff is made.

I have seen him a score of times, at table, insulting this hunter or
that, with cool and level eyes and, withal, a certain air of interest,
pondering their actions or replies or petty rages with a curiosity almost
laughable to me who stood onlooker and who understood.  Concerning his
own rages, I am convinced that they are not real, that they are sometimes
experiments, but that in the main they are the habits of a pose or
attitude he has seen fit to take toward his fellow-men.  I know, with the
possible exception of the incident of the dead mate, that I have not seen
him really angry; nor do I wish ever to see him in a genuine rage, when
all the force of him is called into play.

While on the question of vagaries, I shall tell what befell Thomas
Mugridge in the cabin, and at the same time complete an incident upon
which I have already touched once or twice.  The twelve o’clock dinner
was over, one day, and I had just finished putting the cabin in order,
when Wolf Larsen and Thomas Mugridge descended the companion stairs.
Though the cook had a cubby-hole of a state-room opening off from the
cabin, in the cabin itself he had never dared to linger or to be seen,
and he flitted to and fro, once or twice a day, a timid spectre.

“So you know how to play ‘Nap,’” Wolf Larsen was saying in a pleased sort
of voice.  “I might have guessed an Englishman would know.  I learned it
myself in English ships.”

Thomas Mugridge was beside himself, a blithering imbecile, so pleased was
he at chumming thus with the captain.  The little airs he put on and the
painful striving to assume the easy carriage of a man born to a dignified
place in life would have been sickening had they not been ludicrous.  He
quite ignored my presence, though I credited him with being simply unable
to see me.  His pale, wishy-washy eyes were swimming like lazy summer
seas, though what blissful visions they beheld were beyond my
imagination.

“Get the cards, Hump,” Wolf Larsen ordered, as they took seats at the
table.  “And bring out the cigars and the whisky you’ll find in my
berth.”

I returned with the articles in time to hear the Cockney hinting broadly
that there was a mystery about him, that he might be a gentleman’s son
gone wrong or something or other; also, that he was a remittance man and
was paid to keep away from England—“p’yed ’ansomely, sir,” was the way he
put it; “p’yed ’ansomely to sling my ’ook an’ keep slingin’ it.”

I had brought the customary liquor glasses, but Wolf Larsen frowned,
shook his head, and signalled with his hands for me to bring the
tumblers.  These he filled two-thirds full with undiluted whisky—“a
gentleman’s drink?” quoth Thomas Mugridge,—and they clinked their glasses
to the glorious game of “Nap,” lighted cigars, and fell to shuffling and
dealing the cards.

They played for money.  They increased the amounts of the bets.  They
drank whisky, they drank it neat, and I fetched more.  I do not know
whether Wolf Larsen cheated or not,—a thing he was thoroughly capable of
doing,—but he won steadily.  The cook made repeated journeys to his bunk
for money.  Each time he performed the journey with greater swagger, but
he never brought more than a few dollars at a time.  He grew maudlin,
familiar, could hardly see the cards or sit upright.  As a preliminary to
another journey to his bunk, he hooked Wolf Larsen’s buttonhole with a
greasy forefinger and vacuously proclaimed and reiterated, “I got money,
I got money, I tell yer, an’ I’m a gentleman’s son.”

Wolf Larsen was unaffected by the drink, yet he drank glass for glass,
and if anything his glasses were fuller.  There was no change in him.  He
did not appear even amused at the other’s antics.

In the end, with loud protestations that he could lose like a gentleman,
the cook’s last money was staked on the game—and lost.  Whereupon he
leaned his head on his hands and wept.  Wolf Larsen looked curiously at
him, as though about to probe and vivisect him, then changed his mind, as
from the foregone conclusion that there was nothing there to probe.

“Hump,” he said to me, elaborately polite, “kindly take Mr. Mugridge’s
arm and help him up on deck.  He is not feeling very well.”

“And tell Johnson to douse him with a few buckets of salt water,” he
added, in a lower tone for my ear alone.

I left Mr. Mugridge on deck, in the hands of a couple of grinning sailors
who had been told off for the purpose.  Mr. Mugridge was sleepily
spluttering that he was a gentleman’s son.  But as I descended the
companion stairs to clear the table I heard him shriek as the first
bucket of water struck him.

Wolf Larsen was counting his winnings.

“One hundred and eighty-five dollars even,” he said aloud.  “Just as I
thought.  The beggar came aboard without a cent.”

“And what you have won is mine, sir,” I said boldly.

He favoured me with a quizzical smile.  “Hump, I have studied some
grammar in my time, and I think your tenses are tangled.  ‘Was mine,’ you
should have said, not ’is mine.’”

“It is a question, not of grammar, but of ethics,” I answered.

It was possibly a minute before he spoke.

“D’ye know, Hump,” he said, with a slow seriousness which had in it an
indefinable strain of sadness, “that this is the first time I have heard
the word ‘ethics’ in the mouth of a man.  You and I are the only men on
this ship who know its meaning.”

“At one time in my life,” he continued, after another pause, “I dreamed
that I might some day talk with men who used such language, that I might
lift myself out of the place in life in which I had been born, and hold
conversation and mingle with men who talked about just such things as
ethics.  And this is the first time I have ever heard the word
pronounced.  Which is all by the way, for you are wrong.  It is a
question neither of grammar nor ethics, but of fact.”

“I understand,” I said.  “The fact is that you have the money.”

His face brightened.  He seemed pleased at my perspicacity.  “But it is
avoiding the real question,” I continued, “which is one of right.”

“Ah,” he remarked, with a wry pucker of his mouth, “I see you still
believe in such things as right and wrong.”

“But don’t you?—at all?” I demanded.

“Not the least bit.  Might is right, and that is all there is to it.
Weakness is wrong.  Which is a very poor way of saying that it is good
for oneself to be strong, and evil for oneself to be weak—or better yet,
it is pleasurable to be strong, because of the profits; painful to be
weak, because of the penalties.  Just now the possession of this money is
a pleasurable thing.  It is good for one to possess it.  Being able to
possess it, I wrong myself and the life that is in me if I give it to you
and forego the pleasure of possessing it.”

“But you wrong me by withholding it,” I objected.

“Not at all.  One man cannot wrong another man.  He can only wrong
himself.  As I see it, I do wrong always when I consider the interests of
others.  Don’t you see?  How can two particles of the yeast wrong each
other by striving to devour each other?  It is their inborn heritage to
strive to devour, and to strive not to be devoured.  When they depart
from this they sin.”

“Then you don’t believe in altruism?” I asked.

He received the word as if it had a familiar ring, though he pondered it
thoughtfully.  “Let me see, it means something about coöperation, doesn’t
it?”

“Well, in a way there has come to be a sort of connection,” I answered
unsurprised by this time at such gaps in his vocabulary, which, like his
knowledge, was the acquirement of a self-read, self-educated man, whom no
one had directed in his studies, and who had thought much and talked
little or not at all.  “An altruistic act is an act performed for the
welfare of others.  It is unselfish, as opposed to an act performed for
self, which is selfish.”

He nodded his head.  “Oh, yes, I remember it now.  I ran across it in
Spencer.”

“Spencer!” I cried.  “Have you read him?”

“Not very much,” was his confession.  “I understood quite a good deal of
_First Principles_, but his _Biology_ took the wind out of my sails, and
his _Psychology_ left me butting around in the doldrums for many a day.
I honestly could not understand what he was driving at.  I put it down to
mental deficiency on my part, but since then I have decided that it was
for want of preparation.  I had no proper basis.  Only Spencer and myself
know how hard I hammered.  But I did get something out of his _Data of
Ethics_.  There’s where I ran across ‘altruism,’ and I remember now how
it was used.”

I wondered what this man could have got from such a work.  Spencer I
remembered enough to know that altruism was imperative to his ideal of
highest conduct.  Wolf Larsen, evidently, had sifted the great
philosopher’s teachings, rejecting and selecting according to his needs
and desires.

“What else did you run across?” I asked.

His brows drew in slightly with the mental effort of suitably phrasing
thoughts which he had never before put into speech.  I felt an elation of
spirit.  I was groping into his soul-stuff as he made a practice of
groping in the soul-stuff of others.  I was exploring virgin territory.
A strange, a terribly strange, region was unrolling itself before my
eyes.

“In as few words as possible,” he began, “Spencer puts it something like
this: First, a man must act for his own benefit—to do this is to be moral
and good.  Next, he must act for the benefit of his children.  And third,
he must act for the benefit of his race.”

“And the highest, finest, right conduct,” I interjected, “is that act
which benefits at the same time the man, his children, and his race.”

“I wouldn’t stand for that,” he replied.  “Couldn’t see the necessity for
it, nor the common sense.  I cut out the race and the children.  I would
sacrifice nothing for them.  It’s just so much slush and sentiment, and
you must see it yourself, at least for one who does not believe in
eternal life.  With immortality before me, altruism would be a paying
business proposition.  I might elevate my soul to all kinds of altitudes.
But with nothing eternal before me but death, given for a brief spell
this yeasty crawling and squirming which is called life, why, it would be
immoral for me to perform any act that was a sacrifice.  Any sacrifice
that makes me lose one crawl or squirm is foolish,—and not only foolish,
for it is a wrong against myself and a wicked thing.  I must not lose one
crawl or squirm if I am to get the most out of the ferment.  Nor will the
eternal movelessness that is coming to me be made easier or harder by the
sacrifices or selfishnesses of the time when I was yeasty and acrawl.”

“Then you are an individualist, a materialist, and, logically, a
hedonist.”

“Big words,” he smiled.  “But what is a hedonist?”

He nodded agreement when I had given the definition.  “And you are also,”
I continued, “a man one could not trust in the least thing where it was
possible for a selfish interest to intervene?”

“Now you’re beginning to understand,” he said, brightening.

“You are a man utterly without what the world calls morals?”

“That’s it.”

“A man of whom to be always afraid—”

“That’s the way to put it.”

“As one is afraid of a snake, or a tiger, or a shark?”

“Now you know me,” he said.  “And you know me as I am generally known.
Other men call me ‘Wolf.’”

“You are a sort of monster,” I added audaciously, “a Caliban who has
pondered Setebos, and who acts as you act, in idle moments, by whim and
fancy.”

His brow clouded at the allusion.  He did not understand, and I quickly
learned that he did not know the poem.

“I’m just reading Browning,” he confessed, “and it’s pretty tough.  I
haven’t got very far along, and as it is I’ve about lost my bearings.”

Not to be tiresome, I shall say that I fetched the book from his
state-room and read “Caliban” aloud.  He was delighted.  It was a
primitive mode of reasoning and of looking at things that he understood
thoroughly.  He interrupted again and again with comment and criticism.
When I finished, he had me read it over a second time, and a third.  We
fell into discussion—philosophy, science, evolution, religion.  He
betrayed the inaccuracies of the self-read man, and, it must be granted,
the sureness and directness of the primitive mind.  The very simplicity
of his reasoning was its strength, and his materialism was far more
compelling than the subtly complex materialism of Charley Furuseth.  Not
that I—a confirmed and, as Furuseth phrased it, a temperamental
idealist—was to be compelled; but that Wolf Larsen stormed the last
strongholds of my faith with a vigour that received respect, while not
accorded conviction.

Time passed.  Supper was at hand and the table not laid.  I became
restless and anxious, and when Thomas Mugridge glared down the
companion-way, sick and angry of countenance, I prepared to go about my
duties.  But Wolf Larsen cried out to him:

“Cooky, you’ve got to hustle to-night.  I’m busy with Hump, and you’ll do
the best you can without him.”

And again the unprecedented was established.  That night I sat at table
with the captain and the hunters, while Thomas Mugridge waited on us and
washed the dishes afterward—a whim, a Caliban-mood of Wolf Larsen’s, and
one I foresaw would bring me trouble.  In the meantime we talked and
talked, much to the disgust of the hunters, who could not understand a
word.




CHAPTER IX


Three days of rest, three blessed days of rest, are what I had with Wolf
Larsen, eating at the cabin table and doing nothing but discuss life,
literature, and the universe, the while Thomas Mugridge fumed and raged
and did my work as well as his own.

“Watch out for squalls, is all I can say to you,” was Louis’s warning,
given during a spare half-hour on deck while Wolf Larsen was engaged in
straightening out a row among the hunters.

“Ye can’t tell what’ll be happenin’,” Louis went on, in response to my
query for more definite information.  “The man’s as contrary as air
currents or water currents.  You can never guess the ways iv him.  ’Tis
just as you’re thinkin’ you know him and are makin’ a favourable slant
along him, that he whirls around, dead ahead and comes howlin’ down upon
you and a-rippin’ all iv your fine-weather sails to rags.”

So I was not altogether surprised when the squall foretold by Louis smote
me.  We had been having a heated discussion,—upon life, of course,—and,
grown over-bold, I was passing stiff strictures upon Wolf Larsen and the
life of Wolf Larsen.  In fact, I was vivisecting him and turning over his
soul-stuff as keenly and thoroughly as it was his custom to do it to
others.  It may be a weakness of mine that I have an incisive way of
speech; but I threw all restraint to the winds and cut and slashed until
the whole man of him was snarling.  The dark sun-bronze of his face went
black with wrath, his eyes were ablaze.  There was no clearness or sanity
in them—nothing but the terrific rage of a madman.  It was the wolf in
him that I saw, and a mad wolf at that.

He sprang for me with a half-roar, gripping my arm.  I had steeled myself
to brazen it out, though I was trembling inwardly; but the enormous
strength of the man was too much for my fortitude.  He had gripped me by
the biceps with his single hand, and when that grip tightened I wilted
and shrieked aloud.  My feet went out from under me.  I simply could not
stand upright and endure the agony.  The muscles refused their duty.  The
pain was too great.  My biceps was being crushed to a pulp.

He seemed to recover himself, for a lucid gleam came into his eyes, and
he relaxed his hold with a short laugh that was more like a growl.  I
fell to the floor, feeling very faint, while he sat down, lighted a
cigar, and watched me as a cat watches a mouse.  As I writhed about I
could see in his eyes that curiosity I had so often noted, that wonder
and perplexity, that questing, that everlasting query of his as to what
it was all about.

I finally crawled to my feet and ascended the companion stairs.  Fair
weather was over, and there was nothing left but to return to the galley.
My left arm was numb, as though paralysed, and days passed before I could
use it, while weeks went by before the last stiffness and pain went out
of it.  And he had done nothing but put his hand upon my arm and squeeze.
There had been no wrenching or jerking.  He had just closed his hand with
a steady pressure.  What he might have done I did not fully realize till
next day, when he put his head into the galley, and, as a sign of renewed
friendliness, asked me how my arm was getting on.

“It might have been worse,” he smiled.

I was peeling potatoes.  He picked one up from the pan.  It was
fair-sized, firm, and unpeeled.  He closed his hand upon it, squeezed,
and the potato squirted out between his fingers in mushy streams.  The
pulpy remnant he dropped back into the pan and turned away, and I had a
sharp vision of how it might have fared with me had the monster put his
real strength upon me.

But the three days’ rest was good in spite of it all, for it had given my
knee the very chance it needed.  It felt much better, the swelling had
materially decreased, and the cap seemed descending into its proper
place.  Also, the three days’ rest brought the trouble I had foreseen.
It was plainly Thomas Mugridge’s intention to make me pay for those three
days.  He treated me vilely, cursed me continually, and heaped his own
work upon me.  He even ventured to raise his fist to me, but I was
becoming animal-like myself, and I snarled in his face so terribly that
it must have frightened him back.  It is no pleasant picture I can
conjure up of myself, Humphrey Van Weyden, in that noisome ship’s galley,
crouched in a corner over my task, my face raised to the face of the
creature about to strike me, my lips lifted and snarling like a dog’s, my
eyes gleaming with fear and helplessness and the courage that comes of
fear and helplessness.  I do not like the picture.  It reminds me too
strongly of a rat in a trap.  I do not care to think of it; but it was
elective, for the threatened blow did not descend.

Thomas Mugridge backed away, glaring as hatefully and viciously as I
glared.  A pair of beasts is what we were, penned together and showing
our teeth.  He was a coward, afraid to strike me because I had not
quailed sufficiently in advance; so he chose a new way to intimidate me.
There was only one galley knife that, as a knife, amounted to anything.
This, through many years of service and wear, had acquired a long, lean
blade.  It was unusually cruel-looking, and at first I had shuddered
every time I used it.  The cook borrowed a stone from Johansen and
proceeded to sharpen the knife.  He did it with great ostentation,
glancing significantly at me the while.  He whetted it up and down all
day long.  Every odd moment he could find he had the knife and stone out
and was whetting away.  The steel acquired a razor edge.  He tried it
with the ball of his thumb or across the nail.  He shaved hairs from the
back of his hand, glanced along the edge with microscopic acuteness, and
found, or feigned that he found, always, a slight inequality in its edge
somewhere.  Then he would put it on the stone again and whet, whet, whet,
till I could have laughed aloud, it was so very ludicrous.

It was also serious, for I learned that he was capable of using it, that
under all his cowardice there was a courage of cowardice, like mine, that
would impel him to do the very thing his whole nature protested against
doing and was afraid of doing.  “Cooky’s sharpening his knife for Hump,”
was being whispered about among the sailors, and some of them twitted him
about it.  This he took in good part, and was really pleased, nodding his
head with direful foreknowledge and mystery, until George Leach, the
erstwhile cabin-boy, ventured some rough pleasantry on the subject.

Now it happened that Leach was one of the sailors told off to douse
Mugridge after his game of cards with the captain.  Leach had evidently
done his task with a thoroughness that Mugridge had not forgiven, for
words followed and evil names involving smirched ancestries.  Mugridge
menaced with the knife he was sharpening for me.  Leach laughed and
hurled more of his Telegraph Hill Billingsgate, and before either he or I
knew what had happened, his right arm had been ripped open from elbow to
wrist by a quick slash of the knife.  The cook backed away, a fiendish
expression on his face, the knife held before him in a position of
defence.  But Leach took it quite calmly, though blood was spouting upon
the deck as generously as water from a fountain.

“I’m goin’ to get you, Cooky,” he said, “and I’ll get you hard.  And I
won’t be in no hurry about it.  You’ll be without that knife when I come
for you.”

So saying, he turned and walked quietly forward.  Mugridge’s face was
livid with fear at what he had done and at what he might expect sooner or
later from the man he had stabbed.  But his demeanour toward me was more
ferocious than ever.  In spite of his fear at the reckoning he must
expect to pay for what he had done, he could see that it had been an
object-lesson to me, and he became more domineering and exultant.  Also
there was a lust in him, akin to madness, which had come with sight of
the blood he had drawn.  He was beginning to see red in whatever
direction he looked.  The psychology of it is sadly tangled, and yet I
could read the workings of his mind as clearly as though it were a
printed book.

Several days went by, the _Ghost_ still foaming down the trades, and I
could swear I saw madness growing in Thomas Mugridge’s eyes.  And I
confess that I became afraid, very much afraid.  Whet, whet, whet, it
went all day long.  The look in his eyes as he felt the keen edge and
glared at me was positively carnivorous.  I was afraid to turn my
shoulder to him, and when I left the galley I went out backwards—to the
amusement of the sailors and hunters, who made a point of gathering in
groups to witness my exit.  The strain was too great.  I sometimes
thought my mind would give way under it—a meet thing on this ship of
madmen and brutes.  Every hour, every minute of my existence was in
jeopardy.  I was a human soul in distress, and yet no soul, fore or aft,
betrayed sufficient sympathy to come to my aid.  At times I thought of
throwing myself on the mercy of Wolf Larsen, but the vision of the
mocking devil in his eyes that questioned life and sneered at it would
come strong upon me and compel me to refrain.  At other times I seriously
contemplated suicide, and the whole force of my hopeful philosophy was
required to keep me from going over the side in the darkness of night.

Several times Wolf Larsen tried to inveigle me into discussion, but I
gave him short answers and eluded him.  Finally, he commanded me to
resume my seat at the cabin table for a time and let the cook do my work.
Then I spoke frankly, telling him what I was enduring from Thomas
Mugridge because of the three days of favouritism which had been shown
me.  Wolf Larsen regarded me with smiling eyes.

“So you’re afraid, eh?” he sneered.

“Yes,” I said defiantly and honestly, “I am afraid.”

“That’s the way with you fellows,” he cried, half angrily,
“sentimentalizing about your immortal souls and afraid to die.  At sight
of a sharp knife and a cowardly Cockney the clinging of life to life
overcomes all your fond foolishness.  Why, my dear fellow, you will live
for ever.  You are a god, and God cannot be killed.  Cooky cannot hurt
you.  You are sure of your resurrection.  What’s there to be afraid of?

“You have eternal life before you.  You are a millionaire in immortality,
and a millionaire whose fortune cannot be lost, whose fortune is less
perishable than the stars and as lasting as space or time.  It is
impossible for you to diminish your principal.  Immortality is a thing
without beginning or end.  Eternity is eternity, and though you die here
and now you will go on living somewhere else and hereafter.  And it is
all very beautiful, this shaking off of the flesh and soaring of the
imprisoned spirit.  Cooky cannot hurt you.  He can only give you a boost
on the path you eternally must tread.

“Or, if you do not wish to be boosted just yet, why not boost Cooky?
According to your ideas, he, too, must be an immortal millionaire.  You
cannot bankrupt him.  His paper will always circulate at par.  You cannot
diminish the length of his living by killing him, for he is without
beginning or end.  He’s bound to go on living, somewhere, somehow.  Then
boost him.  Stick a knife in him and let his spirit free.  As it is, it’s
in a nasty prison, and you’ll do him only a kindness by breaking down the
door.  And who knows?—it may be a very beautiful spirit that will go
soaring up into the blue from that ugly carcass.  Boost him along, and
I’ll promote you to his place, and he’s getting forty-five dollars a
month.”

It was plain that I could look for no help or mercy from Wolf Larsen.
Whatever was to be done I must do for myself; and out of the courage of
fear I evolved the plan of fighting Thomas Mugridge with his own weapons.
I borrowed a whetstone from Johansen.  Louis, the boat-steerer, had
already begged me for condensed milk and sugar.  The lazarette, where
such delicacies were stored, was situated beneath the cabin floor.
Watching my chance, I stole five cans of the milk, and that night, when
it was Louis’s watch on deck, I traded them with him for a dirk as lean
and cruel-looking as Thomas Mugridge’s vegetable knife.  It was rusty and
dull, but I turned the grindstone while Louis gave it an edge.  I slept
more soundly than usual that night.

Next morning, after breakfast, Thomas Mugridge began his whet, whet,
whet.  I glanced warily at him, for I was on my knees taking the ashes
from the stove.  When I returned from throwing them overside, he was
talking to Harrison, whose honest yokel’s face was filled with
fascination and wonder.

“Yes,” Mugridge was saying, “an’ wot does ’is worship do but give me two
years in Reading.  But blimey if I cared.  The other mug was fixed
plenty.  Should ’a seen ’im.  Knife just like this.  I stuck it in, like
into soft butter, an’ the w’y ’e squealed was better’n a tu-penny gaff.”
He shot a glance in my direction to see if I was taking it in, and went
on.  “‘I didn’t mean it Tommy,’ ’e was snifflin’; ‘so ’elp me Gawd, I
didn’t mean it!’  ‘I’ll fix yer bloody well right,’ I sez, an’ kept right
after ’im.  I cut ’im in ribbons, that’s wot I did, an’ ’e a-squealin’
all the time.  Once ’e got ’is ’and on the knife an’ tried to ’old it.
‘Ad ’is fingers around it, but I pulled it through, cuttin’ to the bone.
O, ’e was a sight, I can tell yer.”

A call from the mate interrupted the gory narrative, and Harrison went
aft.  Mugridge sat down on the raised threshold to the galley and went on
with his knife-sharpening.  I put the shovel away and calmly sat down on
the coal-box facing him.  He favoured me with a vicious stare.  Still
calmly, though my heart was going pitapat, I pulled out Louis’s dirk and
began to whet it on the stone.  I had looked for almost any sort of
explosion on the Cockney’s part, but to my surprise he did not appear
aware of what I was doing.  He went on whetting his knife.  So did I.
And for two hours we sat there, face to face, whet, whet, whet, till the
news of it spread abroad and half the ship’s company was crowding the
galley doors to see the sight.

Encouragement and advice were freely tendered, and Jock Horner, the
quiet, self-spoken hunter who looked as though he would not harm a mouse,
advised me to leave the ribs alone and to thrust upward for the abdomen,
at the same time giving what he called the “Spanish twist” to the blade.
Leach, his bandaged arm prominently to the fore, begged me to leave a few
remnants of the cook for him; and Wolf Larsen paused once or twice at the
break of the poop to glance curiously at what must have been to him a
stirring and crawling of the yeasty thing he knew as life.

And I make free to say that for the time being life assumed the same
sordid values to me.  There was nothing pretty about it, nothing
divine—only two cowardly moving things that sat whetting steel upon
stone, and a group of other moving things, cowardly and otherwise, that
looked on.  Half of them, I am sure, were anxious to see us shedding each
other’s blood.  It would have been entertainment.  And I do not think
there was one who would have interfered had we closed in a
death-struggle.

On the other hand, the whole thing was laughable and childish.  Whet,
whet, whet,—Humphrey Van Weyden sharpening his knife in a ship’s galley
and trying its edge with his thumb!  Of all situations this was the most
inconceivable.  I know that my own kind could not have believed it
possible.  I had not been called “Sissy” Van Weyden all my days without
reason, and that “Sissy” Van Weyden should be capable of doing this thing
was a revelation to Humphrey Van Weyden, who knew not whether to be
exultant or ashamed.

But nothing happened.  At the end of two hours Thomas Mugridge put away
knife and stone and held out his hand.

“Wot’s the good of mykin’ a ’oly show of ourselves for them mugs?” he
demanded.  “They don’t love us, an’ bloody well glad they’d be a-seein’
us cuttin’ our throats.  Yer not ’arf bad, ’Ump!  You’ve got spunk, as
you Yanks s’y, an’ I like yer in a w’y.  So come on an’ shyke.”

Coward that I might be, I was less a coward than he.  It was a distinct
victory I had gained, and I refused to forego any of it by shaking his
detestable hand.

“All right,” he said pridelessly, “tyke it or leave it, I’ll like yer
none the less for it.”  And to save his face he turned fiercely upon the
onlookers.  “Get outa my galley-doors, you bloomin’ swabs!”

This command was reinforced by a steaming kettle of water, and at sight
of it the sailors scrambled out of the way.  This was a sort of victory
for Thomas Mugridge, and enabled him to accept more gracefully the defeat
I had given him, though, of course, he was too discreet to attempt to
drive the hunters away.

“I see Cooky’s finish,” I heard Smoke say to Horner.

“You bet,” was the reply.  “Hump runs the galley from now on, and Cooky
pulls in his horns.”

Mugridge heard and shot a swift glance at me, but I gave no sign that the
conversation had reached me.  I had not thought my victory was so
far-reaching and complete, but I resolved to let go nothing I had gained.
As the days went by, Smoke’s prophecy was verified.  The Cockney became
more humble and slavish to me than even to Wolf Larsen.  I mistered him
and sirred him no longer, washed no more greasy pots, and peeled no more
potatoes.  I did my own work, and my own work only, and when and in what
fashion I saw fit.  Also I carried the dirk in a sheath at my hip,
sailor-fashion, and maintained toward Thomas Mugridge a constant attitude
which was composed of equal parts of domineering, insult, and contempt.




CHAPTER X


My intimacy with Wolf Larsen increases—if by intimacy may be denoted
those relations which exist between master and man, or, better yet,
between king and jester.  I am to him no more than a toy, and he values
me no more than a child values a toy.  My function is to amuse, and so
long as I amuse all goes well; but let him become bored, or let him have
one of his black moods come upon him, and at once I am relegated from
cabin table to galley, while, at the same time, I am fortunate to escape
with my life and a whole body.

The loneliness of the man is slowly being borne in upon me.  There is not
a man aboard but hates or fears him, nor is there a man whom he does not
despise.  He seems consuming with the tremendous power that is in him and
that seems never to have found adequate expression in works.  He is as
Lucifer would be, were that proud spirit banished to a society of
soulless, Tomlinsonian ghosts.

This loneliness is bad enough in itself, but, to make it worse, he is
oppressed by the primal melancholy of the race.  Knowing him, I review
the old Scandinavian myths with clearer understanding.  The
white-skinned, fair-haired savages who created that terrible pantheon
were of the same fibre as he.  The frivolity of the laughter-loving
Latins is no part of him.  When he laughs it is from a humour that is
nothing else than ferocious.  But he laughs rarely; he is too often sad.
And it is a sadness as deep-reaching as the roots of the race.  It is the
race heritage, the sadness which has made the race sober-minded,
clean-lived and fanatically moral, and which, in this latter connection,
has culminated among the English in the Reformed Church and Mrs. Grundy.

In point of fact, the chief vent to this primal melancholy has been
religion in its more agonizing forms.  But the compensations of such
religion are denied Wolf Larsen.  His brutal materialism will not permit
it.  So, when his blue moods come on, nothing remains for him, but to be
devilish.  Were he not so terrible a man, I could sometimes feel sorry
for him, as instance three mornings ago, when I went into his stateroom
to fill his water-bottle and came unexpectedly upon him.  He did not see
me.  His head was buried in his hands, and his shoulders were heaving
convulsively as with sobs.  He seemed torn by some mighty grief.  As I
softly withdrew I could hear him groaning, “God!  God!  God!”  Not that
he was calling upon God; it was a mere expletive, but it came from his
soul.

At dinner he asked the hunters for a remedy for headache, and by evening,
strong man that he was, he was half-blind and reeling about the cabin.

“I’ve never been sick in my life, Hump,” he said, as I guided him to his
room.  “Nor did I ever have a headache except the time my head was
healing after having been laid open for six inches by a capstan-bar.”

For three days this blinding headache lasted, and he suffered as wild
animals suffer, as it seemed the way on ship to suffer, without plaint,
without sympathy, utterly alone.

This morning, however, on entering his state-room to make the bed and put
things in order, I found him well and hard at work.  Table and bunk were
littered with designs and calculations.  On a large transparent sheet,
compass and square in hand, he was copying what appeared to be a scale of
some sort or other.

“Hello, Hump,” he greeted me genially.  “I’m just finishing the finishing
touches.  Want to see it work?”

“But what is it?” I asked.

“A labour-saving device for mariners, navigation reduced to kindergarten
simplicity,” he answered gaily.  “From to-day a child will be able to
navigate a ship.  No more long-winded calculations.  All you need is one
star in the sky on a dirty night to know instantly where you are.  Look.
I place the transparent scale on this star-map, revolving the scale on
the North Pole.  On the scale I’ve worked out the circles of altitude and
the lines of bearing.  All I do is to put it on a star, revolve the scale
till it is opposite those figures on the map underneath, and presto!
there you are, the ship’s precise location!”

There was a ring of triumph in his voice, and his eyes, clear blue this
morning as the sea, were sparkling with light.

“You must be well up in mathematics,” I said.  “Where did you go to
school?”

“Never saw the inside of one, worse luck,” was the answer.  “I had to dig
it out for myself.”

“And why do you think I have made this thing?” he demanded, abruptly.
“Dreaming to leave footprints on the sands of time?”  He laughed one of
his horrible mocking laughs.  “Not at all.  To get it patented, to make
money from it, to revel in piggishness with all night in while other men
do the work.  That’s my purpose.  Also, I have enjoyed working it out.”

“The creative joy,” I murmured.

“I guess that’s what it ought to be called.  Which is another way of
expressing the joy of life in that it is alive, the triumph of movement
over matter, of the quick over the dead, the pride of the yeast because
it is yeast and crawls.”

I threw up my hands with helpless disapproval of his inveterate
materialism and went about making the bed.  He continued copying lines
and figures upon the transparent scale.  It was a task requiring the
utmost nicety and precision, and I could not but admire the way he
tempered his strength to the fineness and delicacy of the need.

When I had finished the bed, I caught myself looking at him in a
fascinated sort of way.  He was certainly a handsome man—beautiful in the
masculine sense.  And again, with never-failing wonder, I remarked the
total lack of viciousness, or wickedness, or sinfulness in his face.  It
was the face, I am convinced, of a man who did no wrong.  And by this I
do not wish to be misunderstood.  What I mean is that it was the face of
a man who either did nothing contrary to the dictates of his conscience,
or who had no conscience.  I am inclined to the latter way of accounting
for it.  He was a magnificent atavism, a man so purely primitive that he
was of the type that came into the world before the development of the
moral nature.  He was not immoral, but merely unmoral.

As I have said, in the masculine sense his was a beautiful face.
Smooth-shaven, every line was distinct, and it was cut as clear and sharp
as a cameo; while sea and sun had tanned the naturally fair skin to a
dark bronze which bespoke struggle and battle and added both to his
savagery and his beauty.  The lips were full, yet possessed of the
firmness, almost harshness, which is characteristic of thin lips.  The
set of his mouth, his chin, his jaw, was likewise firm or harsh, with all
the fierceness and indomitableness of the male—the nose also.  It was the
nose of a being born to conquer and command.  It just hinted of the eagle
beak.  It might have been Grecian, it might have been Roman, only it was
a shade too massive for the one, a shade too delicate for the other.  And
while the whole face was the incarnation of fierceness and strength, the
primal melancholy from which he suffered seemed to greaten the lines of
mouth and eye and brow, seemed to give a largeness and completeness which
otherwise the face would have lacked.

And so I caught myself standing idly and studying him.  I cannot say how
greatly the man had come to interest me.  Who was he?  What was he?  How
had he happened to be?  All powers seemed his, all potentialities—why,
then, was he no more than the obscure master of a seal-hunting schooner
with a reputation for frightful brutality amongst the men who hunted
seals?

My curiosity burst from me in a flood of speech.

“Why is it that you have not done great things in this world?  With the
power that is yours you might have risen to any height.  Unpossessed of
conscience or moral instinct, you might have mastered the world, broken
it to your hand.  And yet here you are, at the top of your life, where
diminishing and dying begin, living an obscure and sordid existence,
hunting sea animals for the satisfaction of woman’s vanity and love of
decoration, revelling in a piggishness, to use your own words, which is
anything and everything except splendid.  Why, with all that wonderful
strength, have you not done something?  There was nothing to stop you,
nothing that could stop you.  What was wrong?  Did you lack ambition?
Did you fall under temptation?  What was the matter?  What was the
matter?”

He had lifted his eyes to me at the commencement of my outburst, and
followed me complacently until I had done and stood before him breathless
and dismayed.  He waited a moment, as though seeking where to begin, and
then said:

“Hump, do you know the parable of the sower who went forth to sow?  If
you will remember, some of the seed fell upon stony places, where there
was not much earth, and forthwith they sprung up because they had no
deepness of earth.  And when the sun was up they were scorched, and
because they had no root they withered away.  And some fell among thorns,
and the thorns sprung up and choked them.”

“Well?” I said.

“Well?” he queried, half petulantly.  “It was not well.  I was one of
those seeds.”

He dropped his head to the scale and resumed the copying.  I finished my
work and had opened the door to leave, when he spoke to me.

“Hump, if you will look on the west coast of the map of Norway you will
see an indentation called Romsdal Fiord.  I was born within a hundred
miles of that stretch of water.  But I was not born Norwegian.  I am a
Dane.  My father and mother were Danes, and how they ever came to that
bleak bight of land on the west coast I do not know.  I never heard.
Outside of that there is nothing mysterious.  They were poor people and
unlettered.  They came of generations of poor unlettered people—peasants
of the sea who sowed their sons on the waves as has been their custom
since time began.  There is no more to tell.”

“But there is,” I objected.  “It is still obscure to me.”

“What can I tell you?” he demanded, with a recrudescence of fierceness.
“Of the meagreness of a child’s life? of fish diet and coarse living? of
going out with the boats from the time I could crawl? of my brothers, who
went away one by one to the deep-sea farming and never came back? of
myself, unable to read or write, cabin-boy at the mature age of ten on
the coastwise, old-country ships? of the rough fare and rougher usage,
where kicks and blows were bed and breakfast and took the place of
speech, and fear and hatred and pain were my only soul-experiences?  I do
not care to remember.  A madness comes up in my brain even now as I think
of it.  But there were coastwise skippers I would have returned and
killed when a man’s strength came to me, only the lines of my life were
cast at the time in other places.  I did return, not long ago, but
unfortunately the skippers were dead, all but one, a mate in the old
days, a skipper when I met him, and when I left him a cripple who would
never walk again.”

“But you who read Spencer and Darwin and have never seen the inside of a
school, how did you learn to read and write?” I queried.

“In the English merchant service.  Cabin-boy at twelve, ship’s boy at
fourteen, ordinary seamen at sixteen, able seaman at seventeen, and cock
of the fo’c’sle, infinite ambition and infinite loneliness, receiving
neither help nor sympathy, I did it all for myself—navigation,
mathematics, science, literature, and what not.  And of what use has it
been?  Master and owner of a ship at the top of my life, as you say, when
I am beginning to diminish and die.  Paltry, isn’t it?  And when the sun
was up I was scorched, and because I had no root I withered away.”

“But history tells of slaves who rose to the purple,” I chided.

“And history tells of opportunities that came to the slaves who rose to
the purple,” he answered grimly.  “No man makes opportunity.  All the
great men ever did was to know it when it came to them.  The Corsican
knew.  I have dreamed as greatly as the Corsican.  I should have known
the opportunity, but it never came.  The thorns sprung up and choked me.
And, Hump, I can tell you that you know more about me than any living
man, except my own brother.”

“And what is he?  And where is he?”

“Master of the steamship _Macedonia_, seal-hunter,” was the answer.  “We
will meet him most probably on the Japan coast.  Men call him ‘Death’
Larsen.”

“Death Larsen!” I involuntarily cried.  “Is he like you?”

“Hardly.  He is a lump of an animal without any head.  He has all my—my—”

“Brutishness,” I suggested.

“Yes,—thank you for the word,—all my brutishness, but he can scarcely
read or write.”

“And he has never philosophized on life,” I added.

“No,” Wolf Larsen answered, with an indescribable air of sadness.  “And
he is all the happier for leaving life alone.  He is too busy living it
to think about it.  My mistake was in ever opening the books.”




CHAPTER XI


The _Ghost_ has attained the southernmost point of the arc she is
describing across the Pacific, and is already beginning to edge away to
the west and north toward some lone island, it is rumoured, where she
will fill her water-casks before proceeding to the season’s hunt along
the coast of Japan.  The hunters have experimented and practised with
their rifles and shotguns till they are satisfied, and the boat-pullers
and steerers have made their spritsails, bound the oars and rowlocks in
leather and sennit so that they will make no noise when creeping on the
seals, and put their boats in apple-pie order—to use Leach’s homely
phrase.

His arm, by the way, has healed nicely, though the scar will remain all
his life.  Thomas Mugridge lives in mortal fear of him, and is afraid to
venture on deck after dark.  There are two or three standing quarrels in
the forecastle.  Louis tells me that the gossip of the sailors finds its
way aft, and that two of the telltales have been badly beaten by their
mates.  He shakes his head dubiously over the outlook for the man
Johnson, who is boat-puller in the same boat with him.  Johnson has been
guilty of speaking his mind too freely, and has collided two or three
times with Wolf Larsen over the pronunciation of his name.  Johansen he
thrashed on the amidships deck the other night, since which time the mate
has called him by his proper name.  But of course it is out of the
question that Johnson should thrash Wolf Larsen.

Louis has also given me additional information about Death Larsen, which
tallies with the captain’s brief description.  We may expect to meet
Death Larsen on the Japan coast.  “And look out for squalls,” is Louis’s
prophecy, “for they hate one another like the wolf whelps they are.”
Death Larsen is in command of the only sealing steamer in the fleet, the
_Macedonia_, which carries fourteen boats, whereas the rest of the
schooners carry only six.  There is wild talk of cannon aboard, and of
strange raids and expeditions she may make, ranging from opium smuggling
into the States and arms smuggling into China, to blackbirding and open
piracy.  Yet I cannot but believe for I have never yet caught him in a
lie, while he has a cyclopædic knowledge of sealing and the men of the
sealing fleets.

As it is forward and in the galley, so it is in the steerage and aft, on
this veritable hell-ship.  Men fight and struggle ferociously for one
another’s lives.  The hunters are looking for a shooting scrape at any
moment between Smoke and Henderson, whose old quarrel has not healed,
while Wolf Larsen says positively that he will kill the survivor of the
affair, if such affair comes off.  He frankly states that the position he
takes is based on no moral grounds, that all the hunters could kill and
eat one another so far as he is concerned, were it not that he needs them
alive for the hunting.  If they will only hold their hands until the
season is over, he promises them a royal carnival, when all grudges can
he settled and the survivors may toss the non-survivors overboard and
arrange a story as to how the missing men were lost at sea.  I think even
the hunters are appalled at his cold-bloodedness.  Wicked men though they
be, they are certainly very much afraid of him.

Thomas Mugridge is cur-like in his subjection to me, while I go about in
secret dread of him.  His is the courage of fear,—a strange thing I know
well of myself,—and at any moment it may master the fear and impel him to
the taking of my life.  My knee is much better, though it often aches for
long periods, and the stiffness is gradually leaving the arm which Wolf
Larsen squeezed.  Otherwise I am in splendid condition, feel that I am in
splendid condition.  My muscles are growing harder and increasing in
size.  My hands, however, are a spectacle for grief.  They have a
parboiled appearance, are afflicted with hang-nails, while the nails are
broken and discoloured, and the edges of the quick seem to be assuming a
fungoid sort of growth.  Also, I am suffering from boils, due to the
diet, most likely, for I was never afflicted in this manner before.

I was amused, a couple of evenings back, by seeing Wolf Larsen reading
the Bible, a copy of which, after the futile search for one at the
beginning of the voyage, had been found in the dead mate’s sea-chest.  I
wondered what Wolf Larsen could get from it, and he read aloud to me from
Ecclesiastes.  I could imagine he was speaking the thoughts of his own
mind as he read to me, and his voice, reverberating deeply and mournfully
in the confined cabin, charmed and held me.  He may be uneducated, but he
certainly knows how to express the significance of the written word.  I
can hear him now, as I shall always hear him, the primal melancholy
vibrant in his voice as he read:

    “I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
    kings and of the provinces; I gat me men singers and women singers,
    and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that
    of all sorts.

    “So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in
    Jerusalem; also my wisdom returned with me.

    “Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought and on the
    labour that I had laboured to do; and behold, all was vanity and
    vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.

    “All things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous
    and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean;
    to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not; as is the
    good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an
    oath.

    “This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that
    there is one event unto all; yea, also the heart of the sons of men
    is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and
    after that they go to the dead.

    “For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope; for a
    living dog is better than a dead lion.

    “For the living know that they shall die; but the dead know not
    anything, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them
    is forgotten.

    “Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now perished;
    neither have they any more a portion for ever in anything that is
    done under the sun.”

“There you have it, Hump,” he said, closing the book upon his finger and
looking up at me.  “The Preacher who was king over Israel in Jerusalem
thought as I think.  You call me a pessimist.  Is not this pessimism of
the blackest?—‘All is vanity and vexation of spirit,’ ‘There is no profit
under the sun,’ ‘There is one event unto all,’ to the fool and the wise,
the clean and the unclean, the sinner and the saint, and that event is
death, and an evil thing, he says.  For the Preacher loved life, and did
not want to die, saying, ‘For a living dog is better than a dead lion.’
He preferred the vanity and vexation to the silence and unmovableness of
the grave.  And so I.  To crawl is piggish; but to not crawl, to be as
the clod and rock, is loathsome to contemplate.  It is loathsome to the
life that is in me, the very essence of which is movement, the power of
movement, and the consciousness of the power of movement.  Life itself is
unsatisfaction, but to look ahead to death is greater unsatisfaction.”

“You are worse off than Omar,” I said.  “He, at least, after the
customary agonizing of youth, found content and made of his materialism a
joyous thing.”

“Who was Omar?” Wolf Larsen asked, and I did no more work that day, nor
the next, nor the next.

In his random reading he had never chanced upon the Rubáiyát, and it was
to him like a great find of treasure.  Much I remembered, possibly
two-thirds of the quatrains, and I managed to piece out the remainder
without difficulty.  We talked for hours over single stanzas, and I found
him reading into them a wail of regret and a rebellion which, for the
life of me, I could not discover myself.  Possibly I recited with a
certain joyous lilt which was my own, for—his memory was good, and at a
second rendering, very often the first, he made a quatrain his own—he
recited the same lines and invested them with an unrest and passionate
revolt that was well-nigh convincing.

I was interested as to which quatrain he would like best, and was not
surprised when he hit upon the one born of an instant’s irritability, and
quite at variance with the Persian’s complacent philosophy and genial
code of life:

   “What, without asking, hither hurried _Whence_?
   And, without asking, _Whither_ hurried hence!
      Oh, many a Cup of this forbidden Wine
   Must drown the memory of that insolence!”

“Great!” Wolf Larsen cried.  “Great!  That’s the keynote.  Insolence!  He
could not have used a better word.”

In vain I objected and denied.  He deluged me, overwhelmed me with
argument.

“It’s not the nature of life to be otherwise.  Life, when it knows that
it must cease living, will always rebel.  It cannot help itself.  The
Preacher found life and the works of life all a vanity and vexation, an
evil thing; but death, the ceasing to be able to be vain and vexed, he
found an eviler thing.  Through chapter after chapter he is worried by
the one event that cometh to all alike.  So Omar, so I, so you, even you,
for you rebelled against dying when Cooky sharpened a knife for you.  You
were afraid to die; the life that was in you, that composes you, that is
greater than you, did not want to die.  You have talked of the instinct
of immortality.  I talk of the instinct of life, which is to live, and
which, when death looms near and large, masters the instinct, so called,
of immortality.  It mastered it in you (you cannot deny it), because a
crazy Cockney cook sharpened a knife.

“You are afraid of him now.  You are afraid of me.  You cannot deny it.
If I should catch you by the throat, thus,”—his hand was about my throat
and my breath was shut off,—“and began to press the life out of you thus,
and thus, your instinct of immortality will go glimmering, and your
instinct of life, which is longing for life, will flutter up, and you
will struggle to save yourself.  Eh?  I see the fear of death in your
eyes.  You beat the air with your arms.  You exert all your puny strength
to struggle to live.  Your hand is clutching my arm, lightly it feels as
a butterfly resting there.  Your chest is heaving, your tongue
protruding, your skin turning dark, your eyes swimming.  ‘To live!  To
live!  To live!’ you are crying; and you are crying to live here and now,
not hereafter.  You doubt your immortality, eh?  Ha! ha!  You are not
sure of it.  You won’t chance it.  This life only you are certain is
real.  Ah, it is growing dark and darker.  It is the darkness of death,
the ceasing to be, the ceasing to feel, the ceasing to move, that is
gathering about you, descending upon you, rising around you.  Your eyes
are becoming set.  They are glazing.  My voice sounds faint and far.  You
cannot see my face.  And still you struggle in my grip.  You kick with
your legs.  Your body draws itself up in knots like a snake’s.  Your
chest heaves and strains.  To live!  To live!  To live—”

I heard no more.  Consciousness was blotted out by the darkness he had so
graphically described, and when I came to myself I was lying on the floor
and he was smoking a cigar and regarding me thoughtfully with that old
familiar light of curiosity in his eyes.

“Well, have I convinced you?” he demanded.  “Here take a drink of this.
I want to ask you some questions.”

I rolled my head negatively on the floor.  “Your arguments are
too—er—forcible,” I managed to articulate, at cost of great pain to my
aching throat.

“You’ll be all right in half-an-hour,” he assured me.  “And I promise I
won’t use any more physical demonstrations.  Get up now.  You can sit on
a chair.”

And, toy that I was of this monster, the discussion of Omar and the
Preacher was resumed.  And half the night we sat up over it.




CHAPTER XII


The last twenty-four hours have witnessed a carnival of brutality.  From
cabin to forecastle it seems to have broken out like a contagion.  I
scarcely know where to begin.  Wolf Larsen was really the cause of it.
The relations among the men, strained and made tense by feuds, quarrels
and grudges, were in a state of unstable equilibrium, and evil passions
flared up in flame like prairie-grass.

Thomas Mugridge is a sneak, a spy, an informer.  He has been attempting
to curry favour and reinstate himself in the good graces of the captain
by carrying tales of the men forward.  He it was, I know, that carried
some of Johnson’s hasty talk to Wolf Larsen.  Johnson, it seems, bought a
suit of oilskins from the slop-chest and found them to be of greatly
inferior quality.  Nor was he slow in advertising the fact.  The
slop-chest is a sort of miniature dry-goods store which is carried by all
sealing schooners and which is stocked with articles peculiar to the
needs of the sailors.  Whatever a sailor purchases is taken from his
subsequent earnings on the sealing grounds; for, as it is with the
hunters so it is with the boat-pullers and steerers—in the place of wages
they receive a “lay,” a rate of so much per skin for every skin captured
in their particular boat.

But of Johnson’s grumbling at the slop-chest I knew nothing, so that what
I witnessed came with a shock of sudden surprise.  I had just finished
sweeping the cabin, and had been inveigled by Wolf Larsen into a
discussion of Hamlet, his favourite Shakespearian character, when
Johansen descended the companion stairs followed by Johnson.  The
latter’s cap came off after the custom of the sea, and he stood
respectfully in the centre of the cabin, swaying heavily and uneasily to
the roll of the schooner and facing the captain.

“Shut the doors and draw the slide,” Wolf Larsen said to me.

As I obeyed I noticed an anxious light come into Johnson’s eyes, but I
did not dream of its cause.  I did not dream of what was to occur until
it did occur, but he knew from the very first what was coming and awaited
it bravely.  And in his action I found complete refutation of all Wolf
Larsen’s materialism.  The sailor Johnson was swayed by idea, by
principle, and truth, and sincerity.  He was right, he knew he was right,
and he was unafraid.  He would die for the right if needs be, he would be
true to himself, sincere with his soul.  And in this was portrayed the
victory of the spirit over the flesh, the indomitability and moral
grandeur of the soul that knows no restriction and rises above time and
space and matter with a surety and invincibleness born of nothing else
than eternity and immortality.

But to return.  I noticed the anxious light in Johnson’s eyes, but
mistook it for the native shyness and embarrassment of the man.  The
mate, Johansen, stood away several feet to the side of him, and fully
three yards in front of him sat Wolf Larsen on one of the pivotal cabin
chairs.  An appreciable pause fell after I had closed the doors and drawn
the slide, a pause that must have lasted fully a minute.  It was broken
by Wolf Larsen.

“Yonson,” he began.

“My name is Johnson, sir,” the sailor boldly corrected.

“Well, Johnson, then, damn you!  Can you guess why I have sent for you?”

“Yes, and no, sir,” was the slow reply.  “My work is done well.  The mate
knows that, and you know it, sir.  So there cannot be any complaint.”

“And is that all?” Wolf Larsen queried, his voice soft, and low, and
purring.

“I know you have it in for me,” Johnson continued with his unalterable
and ponderous slowness.  “You do not like me.  You—you—”

“Go on,” Wolf Larsen prompted.  “Don’t be afraid of my feelings.”

“I am not afraid,” the sailor retorted, a slight angry flush rising
through his sunburn.  “If I speak not fast, it is because I have not been
from the old country as long as you.  You do not like me because I am too
much of a man; that is why, sir.”

“You are too much of a man for ship discipline, if that is what you mean,
and if you know what I mean,” was Wolf Larsen’s retort.

“I know English, and I know what you mean, sir,” Johnson answered, his
flush deepening at the slur on his knowledge of the English language.

“Johnson,” Wolf Larsen said, with an air of dismissing all that had gone
before as introductory to the main business in hand, “I understand you’re
not quite satisfied with those oilskins?”

“No, I am not.  They are no good, sir.”

“And you’ve been shooting off your mouth about them.”

“I say what I think, sir,” the sailor answered courageously, not failing
at the same time in ship courtesy, which demanded that “sir” be appended
to each speech he made.

It was at this moment that I chanced to glance at Johansen.  His big
fists were clenching and unclenching, and his face was positively
fiendish, so malignantly did he look at Johnson.  I noticed a black
discoloration, still faintly visible, under Johansen’s eye, a mark of the
thrashing he had received a few nights before from the sailor.  For the
first time I began to divine that something terrible was about to be
enacted,—what, I could not imagine.

“Do you know what happens to men who say what you’ve said about my
slop-chest and me?” Wolf Larsen was demanding.

“I know, sir,” was the answer.

“What?” Wolf Larsen demanded, sharply and imperatively.

“What you and the mate there are going to do to me, sir.”

“Look at him, Hump,” Wolf Larsen said to me, “look at this bit of
animated dust, this aggregation of matter that moves and breathes and
defies me and thoroughly believes itself to be compounded of something
good; that is impressed with certain human fictions such as righteousness
and honesty, and that will live up to them in spite of all personal
discomforts and menaces.  What do you think of him, Hump?  What do you
think of him?”

“I think that he is a better man than you are,” I answered, impelled,
somehow, with a desire to draw upon myself a portion of the wrath I felt
was about to break upon his head.  “His human fictions, as you choose to
call them, make for nobility and manhood.  You have no fictions, no
dreams, no ideals.  You are a pauper.”

He nodded his head with a savage pleasantness.  “Quite true, Hump, quite
true.  I have no fictions that make for nobility and manhood.  A living
dog is better than a dead lion, say I with the Preacher.  My only
doctrine is the doctrine of expediency, and it makes for surviving.  This
bit of the ferment we call ‘Johnson,’ when he is no longer a bit of the
ferment, only dust and ashes, will have no more nobility than any dust
and ashes, while I shall still be alive and roaring.”

“Do you know what I am going to do?” he questioned.

I shook my head.

“Well, I am going to exercise my prerogative of roaring and show you how
fares nobility.  Watch me.”

Three yards away from Johnson he was, and sitting down.  Nine feet!  And
yet he left the chair in full leap, without first gaining a standing
position.  He left the chair, just as he sat in it, squarely, springing
from the sitting posture like a wild animal, a tiger, and like a tiger
covered the intervening space.  It was an avalanche of fury that Johnson
strove vainly to fend off.  He threw one arm down to protect the stomach,
the other arm up to protect the head; but Wolf Larsen’s fist drove midway
between, on the chest, with a crushing, resounding impact.  Johnson’s
breath, suddenly expelled, shot from his mouth and as suddenly checked,
with the forced, audible expiration of a man wielding an axe.  He almost
fell backward, and swayed from side to side in an effort to recover his
balance.

I cannot give the further particulars of the horrible scene that
followed.  It was too revolting.  It turns me sick even now when I think
of it.  Johnson fought bravely enough, but he was no match for Wolf
Larsen, much less for Wolf Larsen and the mate.  It was frightful.  I had
not imagined a human being could endure so much and still live and
struggle on.  And struggle on Johnson did.  Of course there was no hope
for him, not the slightest, and he knew it as well as I, but by the
manhood that was in him he could not cease from fighting for that
manhood.

It was too much for me to witness.  I felt that I should lose my mind,
and I ran up the companion stairs to open the doors and escape on deck.
But Wolf Larsen, leaving his victim for the moment, and with one of his
tremendous springs, gained my side and flung me into the far corner of
the cabin.

“The phenomena of life, Hump,” he girded at me.  “Stay and watch it.  You
may gather data on the immortality of the soul.  Besides, you know, we
can’t hurt Johnson’s soul.  It’s only the fleeting form we may demolish.”

It seemed centuries—possibly it was no more than ten minutes that the
beating continued.  Wolf Larsen and Johansen were all about the poor
fellow.  They struck him with their fists, kicked him with their heavy
shoes, knocked him down, and dragged him to his feet to knock him down
again.  His eyes were blinded so that he could not see, and the blood
running from ears and nose and mouth turned the cabin into a shambles.
And when he could no longer rise they still continued to beat and kick
him where he lay.

“Easy, Johansen; easy as she goes,” Wolf Larsen finally said.

But the beast in the mate was up and rampant, and Wolf Larsen was
compelled to brush him away with a back-handed sweep of the arm, gentle
enough, apparently, but which hurled Johansen back like a cork, driving
his head against the wall with a crash.  He fell to the floor, half
stunned for the moment, breathing heavily and blinking his eyes in a
stupid sort of way.

“Jerk open the doors,—Hump,” I was commanded.

I obeyed, and the two brutes picked up the senseless man like a sack of
rubbish and hove him clear up the companion stairs, through the narrow
doorway, and out on deck.  The blood from his nose gushed in a scarlet
stream over the feet of the helmsman, who was none other than Louis, his
boat-mate.  But Louis took and gave a spoke and gazed imperturbably into
the binnacle.

Not so was the conduct of George Leach, the erstwhile cabin-boy.  Fore
and aft there was nothing that could have surprised us more than his
consequent behaviour.  He it was that came up on the poop without orders
and dragged Johnson forward, where he set about dressing his wounds as
well as he could and making him comfortable.  Johnson, as Johnson, was
unrecognizable; and not only that, for his features, as human features at
all, were unrecognizable, so discoloured and swollen had they become in
the few minutes which had elapsed between the beginning of the beating
and the dragging forward of the body.

But of Leach’s behaviour—By the time I had finished cleansing the cabin
he had taken care of Johnson.  I had come up on deck for a breath of
fresh air and to try to get some repose for my overwrought nerves.  Wolf
Larsen was smoking a cigar and examining the patent log which the _Ghost_
usually towed astern, but which had been hauled in for some purpose.
Suddenly Leach’s voice came to my ears.  It was tense and hoarse with an
overmastering rage.  I turned and saw him standing just beneath the break
of the poop on the port side of the galley.  His face was convulsed and
white, his eyes were flashing, his clenched fists raised overhead.

“May God damn your soul to hell, Wolf Larsen, only hell’s too good for
you, you coward, you murderer, you pig!” was his opening salutation.

I was thunderstruck.  I looked for his instant annihilation.  But it was
not Wolf Larsen’s whim to annihilate him.  He sauntered slowly forward to
the break of the poop, and, leaning his elbow on the corner of the cabin,
gazed down thoughtfully and curiously at the excited boy.

And the boy indicted Wolf Larsen as he had never been indicted before.
The sailors assembled in a fearful group just outside the forecastle
scuttle and watched and listened.  The hunters piled pell-mell out of the
steerage, but as Leach’s tirade continued I saw that there was no levity
in their faces.  Even they were frightened, not at the boy’s terrible
words, but at his terrible audacity.  It did not seem possible that any
living creature could thus beard Wolf Larsen in his teeth.  I know for
myself that I was shocked into admiration of the boy, and I saw in him
the splendid invincibleness of immortality rising above the flesh and the
fears of the flesh, as in the prophets of old, to condemn
unrighteousness.

And such condemnation!  He haled forth Wolf Larsen’s soul naked to the
scorn of men.  He rained upon it curses from God and High Heaven, and
withered it with a heat of invective that savoured of a mediæval
excommunication of the Catholic Church.  He ran the gamut of
denunciation, rising to heights of wrath that were sublime and almost
Godlike, and from sheer exhaustion sinking to the vilest and most
indecent abuse.

His rage was a madness.  His lips were flecked with a soapy froth, and
sometimes he choked and gurgled and became inarticulate.  And through it
all, calm and impassive, leaning on his elbow and gazing down, Wolf
Larsen seemed lost in a great curiosity.  This wild stirring of yeasty
life, this terrific revolt and defiance of matter that moved, perplexed
and interested him.

Each moment I looked, and everybody looked, for him to leap upon the boy
and destroy him.  But it was not his whim.  His cigar went out, and he
continued to gaze silently and curiously.

Leach had worked himself into an ecstasy of impotent rage.

“Pig!  Pig!  Pig!” he was reiterating at the top of his lungs.  “Why
don’t you come down and kill me, you murderer?  You can do it!  I ain’t
afraid!  There’s no one to stop you!  Damn sight better dead and outa
your reach than alive and in your clutches!  Come on, you coward!  Kill
me!  Kill me!  Kill me!”

It was at this stage that Thomas Mugridge’s erratic soul brought him into
the scene.  He had been listening at the galley door, but he now came
out, ostensibly to fling some scraps over the side, but obviously to see
the killing he was certain would take place.  He smirked greasily up into
the face of Wolf Larsen, who seemed not to see him.  But the Cockney was
unabashed, though mad, stark mad.  He turned to Leach, saying:

“Such langwidge!  Shockin’!”

Leach’s rage was no longer impotent.  Here at last was something ready to
hand.  And for the first time since the stabbing the Cockney had appeared
outside the galley without his knife.  The words had barely left his
mouth when he was knocked down by Leach.  Three times he struggled to his
feet, striving to gain the galley, and each time was knocked down.

“Oh, Lord!” he cried.  “’Elp!  ’Elp!  Tyke ’im aw’y, carn’t yer?  Tyke
’im aw’y!”

The hunters laughed from sheer relief.  Tragedy had dwindled, the farce
had begun.  The sailors now crowded boldly aft, grinning and shuffling,
to watch the pummelling of the hated Cockney.  And even I felt a great
joy surge up within me.  I confess that I delighted in this beating Leach
was giving to Thomas Mugridge, though it was as terrible, almost, as the
one Mugridge had caused to be given to Johnson.  But the expression of
Wolf Larsen’s face never changed.  He did not change his position either,
but continued to gaze down with a great curiosity.  For all his pragmatic
certitude, it seemed as if he watched the play and movement of life in
the hope of discovering something more about it, of discerning in its
maddest writhings a something which had hitherto escaped him,—the key to
its mystery, as it were, which would make all clear and plain.

But the beating!  It was quite similar to the one I had witnessed in the
cabin.  The Cockney strove in vain to protect himself from the infuriated
boy.  And in vain he strove to gain the shelter of the cabin.  He rolled
toward it, grovelled toward it, fell toward it when he was knocked down.
But blow followed blow with bewildering rapidity.  He was knocked about
like a shuttlecock, until, finally, like Johnson, he was beaten and
kicked as he lay helpless on the deck.  And no one interfered.  Leach
could have killed him, but, having evidently filled the measure of his
vengeance, he drew away from his prostrate foe, who was whimpering and
wailing in a puppyish sort of way, and walked forward.

But these two affairs were only the opening events of the day’s
programme.  In the afternoon Smoke and Henderson fell foul of each other,
and a fusillade of shots came up from the steerage, followed by a
stampede of the other four hunters for the deck.  A column of thick,
acrid smoke—the kind always made by black powder—was arising through the
open companion-way, and down through it leaped Wolf Larsen.  The sound of
blows and scuffling came to our ears.  Both men were wounded, and he was
thrashing them both for having disobeyed his orders and crippled
themselves in advance of the hunting season.  In fact, they were badly
wounded, and, having thrashed them, he proceeded to operate upon them in
a rough surgical fashion and to dress their wounds.  I served as
assistant while he probed and cleansed the passages made by the bullets,
and I saw the two men endure his crude surgery without anæsthetics and
with no more to uphold them than a stiff tumbler of whisky.

Then, in the first dog-watch, trouble came to a head in the forecastle.
It took its rise out of the tittle-tattle and tale-bearing which had been
the cause of Johnson’s beating, and from the noise we heard, and from the
sight of the bruised men next day, it was patent that half the forecastle
had soundly drubbed the other half.

The second dog-watch and the day were wound up by a fight between
Johansen and the lean, Yankee-looking hunter, Latimer.  It was caused by
remarks of Latimer’s concerning the noises made by the mate in his sleep,
and though Johansen was whipped, he kept the steerage awake for the rest
of the night while he blissfully slumbered and fought the fight over and
over again.

As for myself, I was oppressed with nightmare.  The day had been like
some horrible dream.  Brutality had followed brutality, and flaming
passions and cold-blooded cruelty had driven men to seek one another’s
lives, and to strive to hurt, and maim, and destroy.  My nerves were
shocked.  My mind itself was shocked.  All my days had been passed in
comparative ignorance of the animality of man.  In fact, I had known life
only in its intellectual phases.  Brutality I had experienced, but it was
the brutality of the intellect—the cutting sarcasm of Charley Furuseth,
the cruel epigrams and occasional harsh witticisms of the fellows at the
Bibelot, and the nasty remarks of some of the professors during my
undergraduate days.

That was all.  But that men should wreak their anger on others by the
bruising of the flesh and the letting of blood was something strangely
and fearfully new to me.  Not for nothing had I been called “Sissy” Van
Weyden, I thought, as I tossed restlessly on my bunk between one
nightmare and another.  And it seemed to me that my innocence of the
realities of life had been complete indeed.  I laughed bitterly to
myself, and seemed to find in Wolf Larsen’s forbidding philosophy a more
adequate explanation of life than I found in my own.

And I was frightened when I became conscious of the trend of my thought.
The continual brutality around me was degenerative in its effect.  It bid
fair to destroy for me all that was best and brightest in life.  My
reason dictated that the beating Thomas Mugridge had received was an ill
thing, and yet for the life of me I could not prevent my soul joying in
it.  And even while I was oppressed by the enormity of my sin,—for sin it
was,—I chuckled with an insane delight.  I was no longer Humphrey Van
Weyden.  I was Hump, cabin-boy on the schooner _Ghost_.  Wolf Larsen was
my captain, Thomas Mugridge and the rest were my companions, and I was
receiving repeated impresses from the die which had stamped them all.




CHAPTER XIII


For three days I did my own work and Thomas Mugridge’s too; and I flatter
myself that I did his work well.  I know that it won Wolf Larsen’s
approval, while the sailors beamed with satisfaction during the brief
time my _régime_ lasted.

“The first clean bite since I come aboard,” Harrison said to me at the
galley door, as he returned the dinner pots and pans from the forecastle.
“Somehow Tommy’s grub always tastes of grease, stale grease, and I reckon
he ain’t changed his shirt since he left ’Frisco.”

“I know he hasn’t,” I answered.

“And I’ll bet he sleeps in it,” Harrison added.

“And you won’t lose,” I agreed.  “The same shirt, and he hasn’t had it
off once in all this time.”

But three days was all Wolf Larsen allowed him in which to recover from
the effects of the beating.  On the fourth day, lame and sore, scarcely
able to see, so closed were his eyes, he was haled from his bunk by the
nape of the neck and set to his duty.  He sniffled and wept, but Wolf
Larsen was pitiless.

“And see that you serve no more slops,” was his parting injunction.  “No
more grease and dirt, mind, and a clean shirt occasionally, or you’ll get
a tow over the side.  Understand?”

Thomas Mugridge crawled weakly across the galley floor, and a short lurch
of the _Ghost_ sent him staggering.  In attempting to recover himself, he
reached for the iron railing which surrounded the stove and kept the pots
from sliding off; but he missed the railing, and his hand, with his
weight behind it, landed squarely on the hot surface.  There was a sizzle
and odour of burning flesh, and a sharp cry of pain.

“Oh, Gawd, Gawd, wot ’ave I done?” he wailed; sitting down in the
coal-box and nursing his new hurt by rocking back and forth.  “W’y ’as
all this come on me?  It mykes me fair sick, it does, an’ I try so ’ard
to go through life ’armless an’ ’urtin’ nobody.”

The tears were running down his puffed and discoloured cheeks, and his
face was drawn with pain.  A savage expression flitted across it.

“Oh, ’ow I ’ate ’im!  ’Ow I ’ate ’im!” he gritted out.

“Whom?” I asked; but the poor wretch was weeping again over his
misfortunes.  Less difficult it was to guess whom he hated than whom he
did not hate.  For I had come to see a malignant devil in him which
impelled him to hate all the world.  I sometimes thought that he hated
even himself, so grotesquely had life dealt with him, and so monstrously.
At such moments a great sympathy welled up within me, and I felt shame
that I had ever joyed in his discomfiture or pain.  Life had been unfair
to him.  It had played him a scurvy trick when it fashioned him into the
thing he was, and it had played him scurvy tricks ever since.  What
chance had he to be anything else than he was?  And as though answering
my unspoken thought, he wailed:

“I never ’ad no chance, not ’arf a chance!  ’Oo was there to send me to
school, or put tommy in my ’ungry belly, or wipe my bloody nose for me,
w’en I was a kiddy?  ’Oo ever did anything for me, heh?  ’Oo, I s’y?”

“Never mind, Tommy,” I said, placing a soothing hand on his shoulder.
“Cheer up.  It’ll all come right in the end.  You’ve long years before
you, and you can make anything you please of yourself.”

“It’s a lie! a bloody lie!” he shouted in my face, flinging off the hand.
“It’s a lie, and you know it.  I’m already myde, an’ myde out of leavin’s
an’ scraps.  It’s all right for you, ’Ump.  You was born a gentleman.
You never knew wot it was to go ’ungry, to cry yerself asleep with yer
little belly gnawin’ an’ gnawin’, like a rat inside yer.  It carn’t come
right.  If I was President of the United Stytes to-morrer, ’ow would it
fill my belly for one time w’en I was a kiddy and it went empty?

“’Ow could it, I s’y?  I was born to sufferin’ and sorrer.  I’ve had more
cruel sufferin’ than any ten men, I ’ave.  I’ve been in orspital arf my
bleedin’ life.  I’ve ’ad the fever in Aspinwall, in ’Avana, in New
Orleans.  I near died of the scurvy and was rotten with it six months in
Barbadoes.  Smallpox in ’Onolulu, two broken legs in Shanghai, pnuemonia
in Unalaska, three busted ribs an’ my insides all twisted in ’Frisco.
An’ ’ere I am now.  Look at me!  Look at me!  My ribs kicked loose from
my back again.  I’ll be coughin’ blood before eyght bells.  ’Ow can it be
myde up to me, I arsk?  ’Oo’s goin’ to do it?  Gawd?  ’Ow Gawd must ’ave
’ated me w’en ’e signed me on for a voyage in this bloomin’ world of
’is!”

This tirade against destiny went on for an hour or more, and then he
buckled to his work, limping and groaning, and in his eyes a great hatred
for all created things.  His diagnosis was correct, however, for he was
seized with occasional sicknesses, during which he vomited blood and
suffered great pain.  And as he said, it seemed God hated him too much to
let him die, for he ultimately grew better and waxed more malignant than
ever.

Several days more passed before Johnson crawled on deck and went about
his work in a half-hearted way.  He was still a sick man, and I more than
once observed him creeping painfully aloft to a topsail, or drooping
wearily as he stood at the wheel.  But, still worse, it seemed that his
spirit was broken.  He was abject before Wolf Larsen and almost grovelled
to Johansen.  Not so was the conduct of Leach.  He went about the deck
like a tiger cub, glaring his hatred openly at Wolf Larsen and Johansen.

“I’ll do for you yet, you slab-footed Swede,” I heard him say to Johansen
one night on deck.

The mate cursed him in the darkness, and the next moment some missile
struck the galley a sharp rap.  There was more cursing, and a mocking
laugh, and when all was quiet I stole outside and found a heavy knife
imbedded over an inch in the solid wood.  A few minutes later the mate
came fumbling about in search of it, but I returned it privily to Leach
next day.  He grinned when I handed it over, yet it was a grin that
contained more sincere thanks than a multitude of the verbosities of
speech common to the members of my own class.

Unlike any one else in the ship’s company, I now found myself with no
quarrels on my hands and in the good graces of all.  The hunters possibly
no more than tolerated me, though none of them disliked me; while Smoke
and Henderson, convalescent under a deck awning and swinging day and
night in their hammocks, assured me that I was better than any hospital
nurse, and that they would not forget me at the end of the voyage when
they were paid off.  (As though I stood in need of their money!  I, who
could have bought them out, bag and baggage, and the schooner and its
equipment, a score of times over!)  But upon me had devolved the task of
tending their wounds, and pulling them through, and I did my best by
them.

Wolf Larsen underwent another bad attack of headache which lasted two
days.  He must have suffered severely, for he called me in and obeyed my
commands like a sick child.  But nothing I could do seemed to relieve
him.  At my suggestion, however, he gave up smoking and drinking; though
why such a magnificent animal as he should have headaches at all puzzles
me.

“’Tis the hand of God, I’m tellin’ you,” is the way Louis sees it.  “’Tis
a visitation for his black-hearted deeds, and there’s more behind and
comin’, or else—”

“Or else,” I prompted.

“God is noddin’ and not doin’ his duty, though it’s me as shouldn’t say
it.”

I was mistaken when I said that I was in the good graces of all.  Not
only does Thomas Mugridge continue to hate me, but he has discovered a
new reason for hating me.  It took me no little while to puzzle it out,
but I finally discovered that it was because I was more luckily born than
he—“gentleman born,” he put it.

“And still no more dead men,” I twitted Louis, when Smoke and Henderson,
side by side, in friendly conversation, took their first exercise on
deck.

Louis surveyed me with his shrewd grey eyes, and shook his head
portentously.  “She’s a-comin’, I tell you, and it’ll be sheets and
halyards, stand by all hands, when she begins to howl.  I’ve had the feel
iv it this long time, and I can feel it now as plainly as I feel the
rigging iv a dark night.  She’s close, she’s close.”

“Who goes first?” I queried.

“Not fat old Louis, I promise you,” he laughed.  “For ’tis in the bones
iv me I know that come this time next year I’ll be gazin’ in the old
mother’s eyes, weary with watchin’ iv the sea for the five sons she gave
to it.”

“Wot’s ’e been s’yin’ to yer?” Thomas Mugridge demanded a moment later.

“That he’s going home some day to see his mother,” I answered
diplomatically.

“I never ’ad none,” was the Cockney’s comment, as he gazed with
lustreless, hopeless eyes into mine.




CHAPTER XIV


It has dawned upon me that I have never placed a proper valuation upon
womankind.  For that matter, though not amative to any considerable
degree so far as I have discovered, I was never outside the atmosphere of
women until now.  My mother and sisters were always about me, and I was
always trying to escape them; for they worried me to distraction with
their solicitude for my health and with their periodic inroads on my den,
when my orderly confusion, upon which I prided myself, was turned into
worse confusion and less order, though it looked neat enough to the eye.
I never could find anything when they had departed.  But now, alas, how
welcome would have been the feel of their presence, the frou-frou and
swish-swish of their skirts which I had so cordially detested!  I am
sure, if I ever get home, that I shall never be irritable with them
again.  They may dose me and doctor me morning, noon, and night, and dust
and sweep and put my den to rights every minute of the day, and I shall
only lean back and survey it all and be thankful in that I am possessed
of a mother and some several sisters.

All of which has set me wondering.  Where are the mothers of these twenty
and odd men on the _Ghost_?  It strikes me as unnatural and unhealthful
that men should be totally separated from women and herd through the
world by themselves.  Coarseness and savagery are the inevitable results.
These men about me should have wives, and sisters, and daughters; then
would they be capable of softness, and tenderness, and sympathy.  As it
is, not one of them is married.  In years and years not one of them has
been in contact with a good woman, or within the influence, or
redemption, which irresistibly radiates from such a creature.  There is
no balance in their lives.  Their masculinity, which in itself is of the
brute, has been over-developed.  The other and spiritual side of their
natures has been dwarfed—atrophied, in fact.

They are a company of celibates, grinding harshly against one another and
growing daily more calloused from the grinding.  It seems to me
impossible sometimes that they ever had mothers.  It would appear that
they are a half-brute, half-human species, a race apart, wherein there is
no such thing as sex; that they are hatched out by the sun like turtle
eggs, or receive life in some similar and sordid fashion; and that all
their days they fester in brutality and viciousness, and in the end die
as unlovely as they have lived.

Rendered curious by this new direction of ideas, I talked with Johansen
last night—the first superfluous words with which he has favoured me
since the voyage began.  He left Sweden when he was eighteen, is now
thirty-eight, and in all the intervening time has not been home once.  He
had met a townsman, a couple of years before, in some sailor
boarding-house in Chile, so that he knew his mother to be still alive.

“She must be a pretty old woman now,” he said, staring meditatively into
the binnacle and then jerking a sharp glance at Harrison, who was
steering a point off the course.

“When did you last write to her?”

He performed his mental arithmetic aloud.  “Eighty-one; no—eighty-two,
eh? no—eighty-three?  Yes, eighty-three.  Ten years ago.  From some
little port in Madagascar.  I was trading.

“You see,” he went on, as though addressing his neglected mother across
half the girth of the earth, “each year I was going home.  So what was
the good to write?  It was only a year.  And each year something
happened, and I did not go.  But I am mate, now, and when I pay off at
’Frisco, maybe with five hundred dollars, I will ship myself on a
windjammer round the Horn to Liverpool, which will give me more money;
and then I will pay my passage from there home.  Then she will not do any
more work.”

“But does she work? now?  How old is she?”

“About seventy,” he answered.  And then, boastingly, “We work from the
time we are born until we die, in my country.  That’s why we live so
long.  I will live to a hundred.”

I shall never forget this conversation.  The words were the last I ever
heard him utter.  Perhaps they were the last he did utter, too.  For,
going down into the cabin to turn in, I decided that it was too stuffy to
sleep below.  It was a calm night.  We were out of the Trades, and the
_Ghost_ was forging ahead barely a knot an hour.  So I tucked a blanket
and pillow under my arm and went up on deck.

As I passed between Harrison and the binnacle, which was built into the
top of the cabin, I noticed that he was this time fully three points off.
Thinking that he was asleep, and wishing him to escape reprimand or
worse, I spoke to him.  But he was not asleep.  His eyes were wide and
staring.  He seemed greatly perturbed, unable to reply to me.

“What’s the matter?” I asked.  “Are you sick?”

He shook his head, and with a deep sign as of awakening, caught his
breath.

“You’d better get on your course, then,” I chided.

He put a few spokes over, and I watched the compass-card swing slowly to
N.N.W. and steady itself with slight oscillations.

I took a fresh hold on my bedclothes and was preparing to start on, when
some movement caught my eye and I looked astern to the rail.  A sinewy
hand, dripping with water, was clutching the rail.  A second hand took
form in the darkness beside it.  I watched, fascinated.  What visitant
from the gloom of the deep was I to behold?  Whatever it was, I knew that
it was climbing aboard by the log-line.  I saw a head, the hair wet and
straight, shape itself, and then the unmistakable eyes and face of Wolf
Larsen.  His right cheek was red with blood, which flowed from some wound
in the head.

He drew himself inboard with a quick effort, and arose to his feet,
glancing swiftly, as he did so, at the man at the wheel, as though to
assure himself of his identity and that there was nothing to fear from
him.  The sea-water was streaming from him.  It made little audible
gurgles which distracted me.  As he stepped toward me I shrank back
instinctively, for I saw that in his eyes which spelled death.

“All right, Hump,” he said in a low voice.  “Where’s the mate?”

I shook my head.

“Johansen!” he called softly.  “Johansen!”

“Where is he?” he demanded of Harrison.

The young fellow seemed to have recovered his composure, for he answered
steadily enough, “I don’t know, sir.  I saw him go for’ard a little while
ago.”

“So did I go for’ard.  But you will observe that I didn’t come back the
way I went.  Can you explain it?”

“You must have been overboard, sir.”

“Shall I look for him in the steerage, sir?” I asked.

Wolf Larsen shook his head.  “You wouldn’t find him, Hump.  But you’ll
do.  Come on.  Never mind your bedding.  Leave it where it is.”

I followed at his heels.  There was nothing stirring amidships.

“Those cursed hunters,” was his comment.  “Too damned fat and lazy to
stand a four-hour watch.”

But on the forecastle-head we found three sailors asleep.  He turned them
over and looked at their faces.  They composed the watch on deck, and it
was the ship’s custom, in good weather, to let the watch sleep with the
exception of the officer, the helmsman, and the look-out.

“Who’s look-out?” he demanded.

“Me, sir,” answered Holyoak, one of the deep-water sailors, a slight
tremor in his voice.  “I winked off just this very minute, sir.  I’m
sorry, sir.  It won’t happen again.”

“Did you hear or see anything on deck?”

“No, sir, I—”

But Wolf Larsen had turned away with a snort of disgust, leaving the
sailor rubbing his eyes with surprise at having been let of so easily.

“Softly, now,” Wolf Larsen warned me in a whisper, as he doubled his body
into the forecastle scuttle and prepared to descend.

I followed with a quaking heart.  What was to happen I knew no more than
did I know what had happened.  But blood had been shed, and it was
through no whim of Wolf Larsen that he had gone over the side with his
scalp laid open.  Besides, Johansen was missing.

It was my first descent into the forecastle, and I shall not soon forget
my impression of it, caught as I stood on my feet at the bottom of the
ladder.  Built directly in the eyes of the schooner, it was of the shape
of a triangle, along the three sides of which stood the bunks, in
double-tier, twelve of them.  It was no larger than a hall bedroom in
Grub Street, and yet twelve men were herded into it to eat and sleep and
carry on all the functions of living.  My bedroom at home was not large,
yet it could have contained a dozen similar forecastles, and taking into
consideration the height of the ceiling, a score at least.

It smelled sour and musty, and by the dim light of the swinging sea-lamp
I saw every bit of available wall-space hung deep with sea-boots,
oilskins, and garments, clean and dirty, of various sorts.  These swung
back and forth with every roll of the vessel, giving rise to a brushing
sound, as of trees against a roof or wall.  Somewhere a boot thumped
loudly and at irregular intervals against the wall; and, though it was a
mild night on the sea, there was a continual chorus of the creaking
timbers and bulkheads and of abysmal noises beneath the flooring.

The sleepers did not mind.  There were eight of them,—the two watches
below,—and the air was thick with the warmth and odour of their
breathing, and the ear was filled with the noise of their snoring and of
their sighs and half-groans, tokens plain of the rest of the animal-man.
But were they sleeping? all of them?  Or had they been sleeping?  This
was evidently Wolf Larsen’s quest—to find the men who appeared to be
asleep and who were not asleep or who had not been asleep very recently.
And he went about it in a way that reminded me of a story out of
Boccaccio.

He took the sea-lamp from its swinging frame and handed it to me.  He
began at the first bunks forward on the star-board side.  In the top one
lay Oofty-Oofty, a Kanaka and splendid seaman, so named by his mates.  He
was asleep on his back and breathing as placidly as a woman.  One arm was
under his head, the other lay on top of the blankets.  Wolf Larsen put
thumb and forefinger to the wrist and counted the pulse.  In the midst of
it the Kanaka roused.  He awoke as gently as he slept.  There was no
movement of the body whatever.  The eyes, only, moved.  They flashed wide
open, big and black, and stared, unblinking, into our faces.  Wolf Larsen
put his finger to his lips as a sign for silence, and the eyes closed
again.

In the lower bunk lay Louis, grossly fat and warm and sweaty, asleep
unfeignedly and sleeping laboriously.  While Wolf Larsen held his wrist
he stirred uneasily, bowing his body so that for a moment it rested on
shoulders and heels.  His lips moved, and he gave voice to this enigmatic
utterance:

“A shilling’s worth a quarter; but keep your lamps out for
thruppenny-bits, or the publicans ’ll shove ’em on you for sixpence.”

Then he rolled over on his side with a heavy, sobbing sigh, saying:

“A sixpence is a tanner, and a shilling a bob; but what a pony is I don’t
know.”

Satisfied with the honesty of his and the Kanaka’s sleep, Wolf Larsen
passed on to the next two bunks on the starboard side, occupied top and
bottom, as we saw in the light of the sea-lamp, by Leach and Johnson.

As Wolf Larsen bent down to the lower bunk to take Johnson’s pulse, I,
standing erect and holding the lamp, saw Leach’s head rise stealthily as
he peered over the side of his bunk to see what was going on.  He must
have divined Wolf Larsen’s trick and the sureness of detection, for the
light was at once dashed from my hand and the forecastle was left in
darkness.  He must have leaped, also, at the same instant, straight down
on Wolf Larsen.

The first sounds were those of a conflict between a bull and a wolf.  I
heard a great infuriated bellow go up from Wolf Larsen, and from Leach a
snarling that was desperate and blood-curdling.  Johnson must have joined
him immediately, so that his abject and grovelling conduct on deck for
the past few days had been no more than planned deception.

I was so terror-stricken by this fight in the dark that I leaned against
the ladder, trembling and unable to ascend.  And upon me was that old
sickness at the pit of the stomach, caused always by the spectacle of
physical violence.  In this instance I could not see, but I could hear
the impact of the blows—the soft crushing sound made by flesh striking
forcibly against flesh.  Then there was the crashing about of the
entwined bodies, the laboured breathing, the short quick gasps of sudden
pain.

There must have been more men in the conspiracy to murder the captain and
mate, for by the sounds I knew that Leach and Johnson had been quickly
reinforced by some of their mates.

“Get a knife somebody!” Leach was shouting.

“Pound him on the head!  Mash his brains out!” was Johnson’s cry.

But after his first bellow, Wolf Larsen made no noise.  He was fighting
grimly and silently for life.  He was sore beset.  Down at the very
first, he had been unable to gain his feet, and for all of his tremendous
strength I felt that there was no hope for him.

The force with which they struggled was vividly impressed on me; for I
was knocked down by their surging bodies and badly bruised.  But in the
confusion I managed to crawl into an empty lower bunk out of the way.

“All hands!  We’ve got him!  We’ve got him!” I could hear Leach crying.

“Who?” demanded those who had been really asleep, and who had wakened to
they knew not what.

“It’s the bloody mate!” was Leach’s crafty answer, strained from him in a
smothered sort of way.

This was greeted with whoops of joy, and from then on Wolf Larsen had
seven strong men on top of him, Louis, I believe, taking no part in it.
The forecastle was like an angry hive of bees aroused by some marauder.

“What ho! below there!” I heard Latimer shout down the scuttle, too
cautious to descend into the inferno of passion he could hear raging
beneath him in the darkness.

“Won’t somebody get a knife?  Oh, won’t somebody get a knife?” Leach
pleaded in the first interval of comparative silence.

The number of the assailants was a cause of confusion.  They blocked
their own efforts, while Wolf Larsen, with but a single purpose, achieved
his.  This was to fight his way across the floor to the ladder.  Though
in total darkness, I followed his progress by its sound.  No man less
than a giant could have done what he did, once he had gained the foot of
the ladder.  Step by step, by the might of his arms, the whole pack of
men striving to drag him back and down, he drew his body up from the
floor till he stood erect.  And then, step by step, hand and foot, he
slowly struggled up the ladder.

The very last of all, I saw.  For Latimer, having finally gone for a
lantern, held it so that its light shone down the scuttle.  Wolf Larsen
was nearly to the top, though I could not see him.  All that was visible
was the mass of men fastened upon him.  It squirmed about, like some huge
many-legged spider, and swayed back and forth to the regular roll of the
vessel.  And still, step by step with long intervals between, the mass
ascended.  Once it tottered, about to fall back, but the broken hold was
regained and it still went up.

“Who is it?” Latimer cried.

In the rays of the lantern I could see his perplexed face peering down.

“Larsen,” I heard a muffled voice from within the mass.

Latimer reached down with his free hand.  I saw a hand shoot up to clasp
his.  Latimer pulled, and the next couple of steps were made with a rush.
Then Wolf Larsen’s other hand reached up and clutched the edge of the
scuttle.  The mass swung clear of the ladder, the men still clinging to
their escaping foe.  They began to drop off, to be brushed off against
the sharp edge of the scuttle, to be knocked off by the legs which were
now kicking powerfully.  Leach was the last to go, falling sheer back
from the top of the scuttle and striking on head and shoulders upon his
sprawling mates beneath.  Wolf Larsen and the lantern disappeared, and we
were left in darkness.




CHAPTER XV


There was a deal of cursing and groaning as the men at the bottom of the
ladder crawled to their feet.

“Somebody strike a light, my thumb’s out of joint,” said one of the men,
Parsons, a swarthy, saturnine man, boat-steerer in Standish’s boat, in
which Harrison was puller.

“You’ll find it knockin’ about by the bitts,” Leach said, sitting down on
the edge of the bunk in which I was concealed.

There was a fumbling and a scratching of matches, and the sea-lamp flared
up, dim and smoky, and in its weird light bare-legged men moved about
nursing their bruises and caring for their hurts.  Oofty-Oofty laid hold
of Parsons’s thumb, pulling it out stoutly and snapping it back into
place.  I noticed at the same time that the Kanaka’s knuckles were laid
open clear across and to the bone.  He exhibited them, exposing beautiful
white teeth in a grin as he did so, and explaining that the wounds had
come from striking Wolf Larsen in the mouth.

“So it was you, was it, you black beggar?” belligerently demanded one
Kelly, an Irish-American and a longshoreman, making his first trip to
sea, and boat-puller for Kerfoot.

As he made the demand he spat out a mouthful of blood and teeth and
shoved his pugnacious face close to Oofty-Oofty.  The Kanaka leaped
backward to his bunk, to return with a second leap, flourishing a long
knife.

“Aw, go lay down, you make me tired,” Leach interfered.  He was
evidently, for all of his youth and inexperience, cock of the forecastle.
“G’wan, you Kelly.  You leave Oofty alone.  How in hell did he know it
was you in the dark?”

Kelly subsided with some muttering, and the Kanaka flashed his white
teeth in a grateful smile.  He was a beautiful creature, almost feminine
in the pleasing lines of his figure, and there was a softness and
dreaminess in his large eyes which seemed to contradict his well-earned
reputation for strife and action.

“How did he get away?” Johnson asked.

He was sitting on the side of his bunk, the whole pose of his figure
indicating utter dejection and hopelessness.  He was still breathing
heavily from the exertion he had made.  His shirt had been ripped
entirely from him in the struggle, and blood from a gash in the cheek was
flowing down his naked chest, marking a red path across his white thigh
and dripping to the floor.

“Because he is the devil, as I told you before,” was Leach’s answer; and
thereat he was on his feet and raging his disappointment with tears in
his eyes.

“And not one of you to get a knife!” was his unceasing lament.

But the rest of the hands had a lively fear of consequences to come and
gave no heed to him.

“How’ll he know which was which?” Kelly asked, and as he went on he
looked murderously about him—“unless one of us peaches.”

“He’ll know as soon as ever he claps eyes on us,” Parsons replied.  “One
look at you’d be enough.”

“Tell him the deck flopped up and gouged yer teeth out iv yer jaw,” Louis
grinned.  He was the only man who was not out of his bunk, and he was
jubilant in that he possessed no bruises to advertise that he had had a
hand in the night’s work.  “Just wait till he gets a glimpse iv yer mugs
to-morrow, the gang iv ye,” he chuckled.

“We’ll say we thought it was the mate,” said one.  And another, “I know
what I’ll say—that I heered a row, jumped out of my bunk, got a jolly
good crack on the jaw for my pains, and sailed in myself.  Couldn’t tell
who or what it was in the dark and just hit out.”

“An’ ’twas me you hit, of course,” Kelly seconded, his face brightening
for the moment.

Leach and Johnson took no part in the discussion, and it was plain to see
that their mates looked upon them as men for whom the worst was
inevitable, who were beyond hope and already dead.  Leach stood their
fears and reproaches for some time.  Then he broke out:

“You make me tired!  A nice lot of gazabas you are!  If you talked less
with yer mouth and did something with yer hands, he’d a-ben done with by
now.  Why couldn’t one of you, just one of you, get me a knife when I
sung out?  You make me sick!  A-beefin’ and bellerin’ ’round, as though
he’d kill you when he gets you!  You know damn well he wont.  Can’t
afford to.  No shipping masters or beach-combers over here, and he wants
yer in his business, and he wants yer bad.  Who’s to pull or steer or
sail ship if he loses yer?  It’s me and Johnson have to face the music.
Get into yer bunks, now, and shut yer faces; I want to get some sleep.”

“That’s all right all right,” Parsons spoke up.  “Mebbe he won’t do for
us, but mark my words, hell ’ll be an ice-box to this ship from now on.”

All the while I had been apprehensive concerning my own predicament.
What would happen to me when these men discovered my presence?  I could
never fight my way out as Wolf Larsen had done.  And at this moment
Latimer called down the scuttles:

“Hump!  The old man wants you!”

“He ain’t down here!” Parsons called back.

“Yes, he is,” I said, sliding out of the bunk and striving my hardest to
keep my voice steady and bold.

The sailors looked at me in consternation.  Fear was strong in their
faces, and the devilishness which comes of fear.

“I’m coming!” I shouted up to Latimer.

“No you don’t!” Kelly cried, stepping between me and the ladder, his
right hand shaped into a veritable strangler’s clutch.  “You damn little
sneak!  I’ll shut yer mouth!”

“Let him go,” Leach commanded.

“Not on yer life,” was the angry retort.

Leach never changed his position on the edge of the bunk.  “Let him go, I
say,” he repeated; but this time his voice was gritty and metallic.

The Irishman wavered.  I made to step by him, and he stood aside.  When I
had gained the ladder, I turned to the circle of brutal and malignant
faces peering at me through the semi-darkness.  A sudden and deep
sympathy welled up in me.  I remembered the Cockney’s way of putting it.
How God must have hated them that they should be tortured so!

“I have seen and heard nothing, believe me,” I said quietly.

“I tell yer, he’s all right,” I could hear Leach saying as I went up the
ladder.  “He don’t like the old man no more nor you or me.”

I found Wolf Larsen in the cabin, stripped and bloody, waiting for me.
He greeted me with one of his whimsical smiles.

“Come, get to work, Doctor.  The signs are favourable for an extensive
practice this voyage.  I don’t know what the _Ghost_ would have been
without you, and if I could only cherish such noble sentiments I would
tell you her master is deeply grateful.”

I knew the run of the simple medicine-chest the _Ghost_ carried, and
while I was heating water on the cabin stove and getting the things ready
for dressing his wounds, he moved about, laughing and chatting, and
examining his hurts with a calculating eye.  I had never before seen him
stripped, and the sight of his body quite took my breath away.  It has
never been my weakness to exalt the flesh—far from it; but there is
enough of the artist in me to appreciate its wonder.

I must say that I was fascinated by the perfect lines of Wolf Larsen’s
figure, and by what I may term the terrible beauty of it.  I had noted
the men in the forecastle.  Powerfully muscled though some of them were,
there had been something wrong with all of them, an insufficient
development here, an undue development there, a twist or a crook that
destroyed symmetry, legs too short or too long, or too much sinew or bone
exposed, or too little.  Oofty-Oofty had been the only one whose lines
were at all pleasing, while, in so far as they pleased, that far had they
been what I should call feminine.

But Wolf Larsen was the man-type, the masculine, and almost a god in his
perfectness.  As he moved about or raised his arms the great muscles
leapt and moved under the satiny skin.  I have forgotten to say that the
bronze ended with his face.  His body, thanks to his Scandinavian stock,
was fair as the fairest woman’s.  I remember his putting his hand up to
feel of the wound on his head, and my watching the biceps move like a
living thing under its white sheath.  It was the biceps that had nearly
crushed out my life once, that I had seen strike so many killing blows.
I could not take my eyes from him.  I stood motionless, a roll of
antiseptic cotton in my hand unwinding and spilling itself down to the
floor.

He noticed me, and I became conscious that I was staring at him.

“God made you well,” I said.

“Did he?” he answered.  “I have often thought so myself, and wondered
why.”

“Purpose—” I began.

“Utility,” he interrupted.  “This body was made for use.  These muscles
were made to grip, and tear, and destroy living things that get between
me and life.  But have you thought of the other living things?  They,
too, have muscles, of one kind and another, made to grip, and tear, and
destroy; and when they come between me and life, I out-grip them,
out-tear them, out-destroy them.  Purpose does not explain that.  Utility
does.”

“It is not beautiful,” I protested.

“Life isn’t, you mean,” he smiled.  “Yet you say I was made well.  Do you
see this?”

He braced his legs and feet, pressing the cabin floor with his toes in a
clutching sort of way.  Knots and ridges and mounds of muscles writhed
and bunched under the skin.

“Feel them,” he commanded.

They were hard as iron.  And I observed, also, that his whole body had
unconsciously drawn itself together, tense and alert; that muscles were
softly crawling and shaping about the hips, along the back, and across
the shoulders; that the arms were slightly lifted, their muscles
contracting, the fingers crooking till the hands were like talons; and
that even the eyes had changed expression and into them were coming
watchfulness and measurement and a light none other than of battle.

“Stability, equilibrium,” he said, relaxing on the instant and sinking
his body back into repose.  “Feet with which to clutch the ground, legs
to stand on and to help withstand, while with arms and hands, teeth and
nails, I struggle to kill and to be not killed.  Purpose?  Utility is the
better word.”

I did not argue.  I had seen the mechanism of the primitive fighting
beast, and I was as strongly impressed as if I had seen the engines of a
great battleship or Atlantic liner.

I was surprised, considering the fierce struggle in the forecastle, at
the superficiality of his hurts, and I pride myself that I dressed them
dexterously.  With the exception of several bad wounds, the rest were
merely severe bruises and lacerations.  The blow which he had received
before going overboard had laid his scalp open several inches.  This,
under his direction, I cleansed and sewed together, having first shaved
the edges of the wound.  Then the calf of his leg was badly lacerated and
looked as though it had been mangled by a bulldog.  Some sailor, he told
me, had laid hold of it by his teeth, at the beginning of the fight, and
hung on and been dragged to the top of the forecastle ladder, when he was
kicked loose.

“By the way, Hump, as I have remarked, you are a handy man,” Wolf Larsen
began, when my work was done.  “As you know, we’re short a mate.
Hereafter you shall stand watches, receive seventy-five dollars per
month, and be addressed fore and aft as Mr. Van Weyden.”

“I—I don’t understand navigation, you know,” I gasped.

“Not necessary at all.”

“I really do not care to sit in the high places,” I objected.  “I find
life precarious enough in my present humble situation.  I have no
experience.  Mediocrity, you see, has its compensations.”

He smiled as though it were all settled.

“I won’t be mate on this hell-ship!” I cried defiantly.

I saw his face grow hard and the merciless glitter come into his eyes.
He walked to the door of his room, saying:

“And now, Mr. Van Weyden, good-night.”

“Good-night, Mr. Larsen,” I answered weakly.




CHAPTER XVI


I cannot say that the position of mate carried with it anything more
joyful than that there were no more dishes to wash.  I was ignorant of
the simplest duties of mate, and would have fared badly indeed, had the
sailors not sympathized with me.  I knew nothing of the minutiæ of ropes
and rigging, of the trimming and setting of sails; but the sailors took
pains to put me to rights,—Louis proving an especially good teacher,—and
I had little trouble with those under me.

With the hunters it was otherwise.  Familiar in varying degree with the
sea, they took me as a sort of joke.  In truth, it was a joke to me, that
I, the veriest landsman, should be filling the office of mate; but to be
taken as a joke by others was a different matter.  I made no complaint,
but Wolf Larsen demanded the most punctilious sea etiquette in my
case,—far more than poor Johansen had ever received; and at the expense
of several rows, threats, and much grumbling, he brought the hunters to
time.  I was “Mr. Van Weyden” fore and aft, and it was only unofficially
that Wolf Larsen himself ever addressed me as “Hump.”

It was amusing.  Perhaps the wind would haul a few points while we were
at dinner, and as I left the table he would say, “Mr. Van Weyden, will
you kindly put about on the port tack.”  And I would go on deck, beckon
Louis to me, and learn from him what was to be done.  Then, a few minutes
later, having digested his instructions and thoroughly mastered the
manœuvre, I would proceed to issue my orders.  I remember an early
instance of this kind, when Wolf Larsen appeared on the scene just as I
had begun to give orders.  He smoked his cigar and looked on quietly till
the thing was accomplished, and then paced aft by my side along the
weather poop.

“Hump,” he said, “I beg pardon, Mr. Van Weyden, I congratulate you.  I
think you can now fire your father’s legs back into the grave to him.
You’ve discovered your own and learned to stand on them.  A little
rope-work, sail-making, and experience with storms and such things, and
by the end of the voyage you could ship on any coasting schooner.”

It was during this period, between the death of Johansen and the arrival
on the sealing grounds, that I passed my pleasantest hours on the
_Ghost_.  Wolf Larsen was quite considerate, the sailors helped me, and I
was no longer in irritating contact with Thomas Mugridge.  And I make
free to say, as the days went by, that I found I was taking a certain
secret pride in myself.  Fantastic as the situation was,—a land-lubber
second in command,—I was, nevertheless, carrying it off well; and during
that brief time I was proud of myself, and I grew to love the heave and
roll of the _Ghost_ under my feet as she wallowed north and west through
the tropic sea to the islet where we filled our water-casks.

But my happiness was not unalloyed.  It was comparative, a period of less
misery slipped in between a past of great miseries and a future of great
miseries.  For the _Ghost_, so far as the seamen were concerned, was a
hell-ship of the worst description.  They never had a moment’s rest or
peace.  Wolf Larsen treasured against them the attempt on his life and
the drubbing he had received in the forecastle; and morning, noon, and
night, and all night as well, he devoted himself to making life unlivable
for them.

He knew well the psychology of the little thing, and it was the little
things by which he kept the crew worked up to the verge of madness.  I
have seen Harrison called from his bunk to put properly away a misplaced
paintbrush, and the two watches below haled from their tired sleep to
accompany him and see him do it.  A little thing, truly, but when
multiplied by the thousand ingenious devices of such a mind, the mental
state of the men in the forecastle may be slightly comprehended.

Of course much grumbling went on, and little outbursts were continually
occurring.  Blows were struck, and there were always two or three men
nursing injuries at the hands of the human beast who was their master.
Concerted action was impossible in face of the heavy arsenal of weapons
carried in the steerage and cabin.  Leach and Johnson were the two
particular victims of Wolf Larsen’s diabolic temper, and the look of
profound melancholy which had settled on Johnson’s face and in his eyes
made my heart bleed.

With Leach it was different.  There was too much of the fighting beast in
him.  He seemed possessed by an insatiable fury which gave no time for
grief.  His lips had become distorted into a permanent snarl, which at
mere sight of Wolf Larsen broke out in sound, horrible and menacing and,
I do believe, unconsciously.  I have seen him follow Wolf Larsen about
with his eyes, like an animal its keeper, the while the animal-like snarl
sounded deep in his throat and vibrated forth between his teeth.

I remember once, on deck, in bright day, touching him on the shoulder as
preliminary to giving an order.  His back was toward me, and at the first
feel of my hand he leaped upright in the air and away from me, snarling
and turning his head as he leaped.  He had for the moment mistaken me for
the man he hated.

Both he and Johnson would have killed Wolf Larsen at the slightest
opportunity, but the opportunity never came.  Wolf Larsen was too wise
for that, and, besides, they had no adequate weapons.  With their fists
alone they had no chance whatever.  Time and again he fought it out with
Leach who fought back always, like a wildcat, tooth and nail and fist,
until stretched, exhausted or unconscious, on the deck.  And he was never
averse to another encounter.  All the devil that was in him challenged
the devil in Wolf Larsen.  They had but to appear on deck at the same
time, when they would be at it, cursing, snarling, striking; and I have
seen Leach fling himself upon Wolf Larsen without warning or provocation.
Once he threw his heavy sheath-knife, missing Wolf Larsen’s throat by an
inch.  Another time he dropped a steel marlinspike from the mizzen
crosstree.  It was a difficult cast to make on a rolling ship, but the
sharp point of the spike, whistling seventy-five feet through the air,
barely missed Wolf Larsen’s head as he emerged from the cabin
companion-way and drove its length two inches and over into the solid
deck-planking.  Still another time, he stole into the steerage, possessed
himself of a loaded shot-gun, and was making a rush for the deck with it
when caught by Kerfoot and disarmed.

I often wondered why Wolf Larsen did not kill him and make an end of it.
But he only laughed and seemed to enjoy it.  There seemed a certain spice
about it, such as men must feel who take delight in making pets of
ferocious animals.

“It gives a thrill to life,” he explained to me, “when life is carried in
one’s hand.  Man is a natural gambler, and life is the biggest stake he
can lay.  The greater the odds, the greater the thrill.  Why should I
deny myself the joy of exciting Leach’s soul to fever-pitch?  For that
matter, I do him a kindness.  The greatness of sensation is mutual.  He
is living more royally than any man for’ard, though he does not know it.
For he has what they have not—purpose, something to do and be done, an
all-absorbing end to strive to attain, the desire to kill me, the hope
that he may kill me.  Really, Hump, he is living deep and high.  I doubt
that he has ever lived so swiftly and keenly before, and I honestly envy
him, sometimes, when I see him raging at the summit of passion and
sensibility.”

“Ah, but it is cowardly, cowardly!” I cried.  “You have all the
advantage.”

“Of the two of us, you and I, who is the greater coward?” he asked
seriously.  “If the situation is unpleasing, you compromise with your
conscience when you make yourself a party to it.  If you were really
great, really true to yourself, you would join forces with Leach and
Johnson.  But you are afraid, you are afraid.  You want to live.  The
life that is in you cries out that it must live, no matter what the cost;
so you live ignominiously, untrue to the best you dream of, sinning
against your whole pitiful little code, and, if there were a hell,
heading your soul straight for it.  Bah!  I play the braver part.  I do
no sin, for I am true to the promptings of the life that is in me.  I am
sincere with my soul at least, and that is what you are not.”

There was a sting in what he said.  Perhaps, after all, I was playing a
cowardly part.  And the more I thought about it the more it appeared that
my duty to myself lay in doing what he had advised, lay in joining forces
with Johnson and Leach and working for his death.  Right here, I think,
entered the austere conscience of my Puritan ancestry, impelling me
toward lurid deeds and sanctioning even murder as right conduct.  I dwelt
upon the idea.  It would be a most moral act to rid the world of such a
monster.  Humanity would be better and happier for it, life fairer and
sweeter.

I pondered it long, lying sleepless in my bunk and reviewing in endless
procession the facts of the situation.  I talked with Johnson and Leach,
during the night watches when Wolf Larsen was below.  Both men had lost
hope—Johnson, because of temperamental despondency; Leach, because he had
beaten himself out in the vain struggle and was exhausted.  But he caught
my hand in a passionate grip one night, saying:

“I think yer square, Mr. Van Weyden.  But stay where you are and keep yer
mouth shut.  Say nothin’ but saw wood.  We’re dead men, I know it; but
all the same you might be able to do us a favour some time when we need
it damn bad.”

It was only next day, when Wainwright Island loomed to windward, close
abeam, that Wolf Larsen opened his mouth in prophecy.  He had attacked
Johnson, been attacked by Leach, and had just finished whipping the pair
of them.

“Leach,” he said, “you know I’m going to kill you some time or other,
don’t you?”

A snarl was the answer.

“And as for you, Johnson, you’ll get so tired of life before I’m through
with you that you’ll fling yourself over the side.  See if you don’t.”

“That’s a suggestion,” he added, in an aside to me.  “I’ll bet you a
month’s pay he acts upon it.”

I had cherished a hope that his victims would find an opportunity to
escape while filling our water-barrels, but Wolf Larsen had selected his
spot well.  The _Ghost_ lay half-a-mile beyond the surf-line of a lonely
beach.  Here debauched a deep gorge, with precipitous, volcanic walls
which no man could scale.  And here, under his direct supervision—for he
went ashore himself—Leach and Johnson filled the small casks and rolled
them down to the beach.  They had no chance to make a break for liberty
in one of the boats.

Harrison and Kelly, however, made such an attempt.  They composed one of
the boats’ crews, and their task was to ply between the schooner and the
shore, carrying a single cask each trip.  Just before dinner, starting
for the beach with an empty barrel, they altered their course and bore
away to the left to round the promontory which jutted into the sea
between them and liberty.  Beyond its foaming base lay the pretty
villages of the Japanese colonists and smiling valleys which penetrated
deep into the interior.  Once in the fastnesses they promised, and the
two men could defy Wolf Larsen.

I had observed Henderson and Smoke loitering about the deck all morning,
and I now learned why they were there.  Procuring their rifles, they
opened fire in a leisurely manner, upon the deserters.  It was a
cold-blooded exhibition of marksmanship.  At first their bullets zipped
harmlessly along the surface of the water on either side the boat; but,
as the men continued to pull lustily, they struck closer and closer.

“Now, watch me take Kelly’s right oar,” Smoke said, drawing a more
careful aim.

I was looking through the glasses, and I saw the oar-blade shatter as he
shot.  Henderson duplicated it, selecting Harrison’s right oar.  The boat
slewed around.  The two remaining oars were quickly broken.  The men
tried to row with the splinters, and had them shot out of their hands.
Kelly ripped up a bottom board and began paddling, but dropped it with a
cry of pain as its splinters drove into his hands.  Then they gave up,
letting the boat drift till a second boat, sent from the shore by Wolf
Larsen, took them in tow and brought them aboard.

Late that afternoon we hove up anchor and got away.  Nothing was before
us but the three or four months’ hunting on the sealing grounds.  The
outlook was black indeed, and I went about my work with a heavy heart.
An almost funereal gloom seemed to have descended upon the _Ghost_.  Wolf
Larsen had taken to his bunk with one of his strange, splitting
headaches.  Harrison stood listlessly at the wheel, half supporting
himself by it, as though wearied by the weight of his flesh.  The rest of
the men were morose and silent.  I came upon Kelly crouching to the lee
of the forecastle scuttle, his head on his knees, his arms about his
head, in an attitude of unutterable despondency.

Johnson I found lying full length on the forecastle head, staring at the
troubled churn of the forefoot, and I remembered with horror the
suggestion Wolf Larsen had made.  It seemed likely to bear fruit.  I
tried to break in on the man’s morbid thoughts by calling him away, but
he smiled sadly at me and refused to obey.

Leach approached me as I returned aft.

“I want to ask a favour, Mr. Van Weyden,” he said.  “If it’s yer luck to
ever make ’Frisco once more, will you hunt up Matt McCarthy?  He’s my old
man.  He lives on the Hill, back of the Mayfair bakery, runnin’ a
cobbler’s shop that everybody knows, and you’ll have no trouble.  Tell
him I lived to be sorry for the trouble I brought him and the things I
done, and—and just tell him ‘God bless him,’ for me.”

I nodded my head, but said, “We’ll all win back to San Francisco, Leach,
and you’ll be with me when I go to see Matt McCarthy.”

“I’d like to believe you,” he answered, shaking my hand, “but I can’t.
Wolf Larsen ’ll do for me, I know it; and all I can hope is, he’ll do it
quick.”

And as he left me I was aware of the same desire at my heart.  Since it
was to be done, let it be done with despatch.  The general gloom had
gathered me into its folds.  The worst appeared inevitable; and as I
paced the deck, hour after hour, I found myself afflicted with Wolf
Larsen’s repulsive ideas.  What was it all about?  Where was the grandeur
of life that it should permit such wanton destruction of human souls?  It
was a cheap and sordid thing after all, this life, and the sooner over
the better.  Over and done with!  I, too, leaned upon the rail and gazed
longingly into the sea, with the certainty that sooner or later I should
be sinking down, down, through the cool green depths of its oblivion.




CHAPTER XVII


Strange to say, in spite of the general foreboding, nothing of especial
moment happened on the _Ghost_.  We ran on to the north and west till we
raised the coast of Japan and picked up with the great seal herd.  Coming
from no man knew where in the illimitable Pacific, it was travelling
north on its annual migration to the rookeries of Bering Sea.  And north
we travelled with it, ravaging and destroying, flinging the naked
carcasses to the shark and salting down the skins so that they might
later adorn the fair shoulders of the women of the cities.

It was wanton slaughter, and all for woman’s sake.  No man ate of the
seal meat or the oil.  After a good day’s killing I have seen our decks
covered with hides and bodies, slippery with fat and blood, the scuppers
running red; masts, ropes, and rails spattered with the sanguinary
colour; and the men, like butchers plying their trade, naked and red of
arm and hand, hard at work with ripping and flensing-knives, removing the
skins from the pretty sea-creatures they had killed.

It was my task to tally the pelts as they came aboard from the boats, to
oversee the skinning and afterward the cleansing of the decks and
bringing things ship-shape again.  It was not pleasant work.  My soul and
my stomach revolted at it; and yet, in a way, this handling and directing
of many men was good for me.  It developed what little executive ability
I possessed, and I was aware of a toughening or hardening which I was
undergoing and which could not be anything but wholesome for “Sissy” Van
Weyden.

One thing I was beginning to feel, and that was that I could never again
be quite the same man I had been.  While my hope and faith in human life
still survived Wolf Larsen’s destructive criticism, he had nevertheless
been a cause of change in minor matters.  He had opened up for me the
world of the real, of which I had known practically nothing and from
which I had always shrunk.  I had learned to look more closely at life as
it was lived, to recognize that there were such things as facts in the
world, to emerge from the realm of mind and idea and to place certain
values on the concrete and objective phases of existence.

I saw more of Wolf Larsen than ever when we had gained the grounds.  For
when the weather was fair and we were in the midst of the herd, all hands
were away in the boats, and left on board were only he and I, and Thomas
Mugridge, who did not count.  But there was no play about it.  The six
boats, spreading out fan-wise from the schooner until the first weather
boat and the last lee boat were anywhere from ten to twenty miles apart,
cruised along a straight course over the sea till nightfall or bad
weather drove them in.  It was our duty to sail the _Ghost_ well to
leeward of the last lee boat, so that all the boats should have fair wind
to run for us in case of squalls or threatening weather.

It is no slight matter for two men, particularly when a stiff wind has
sprung up, to handle a vessel like the _Ghost_, steering, keeping
look-out for the boats, and setting or taking in sail; so it devolved
upon me to learn, and learn quickly.  Steering I picked up easily, but
running aloft to the crosstrees and swinging my whole weight by my arms
when I left the ratlines and climbed still higher, was more difficult.
This, too, I learned, and quickly, for I felt somehow a wild desire to
vindicate myself in Wolf Larsen’s eyes, to prove my right to live in ways
other than of the mind.  Nay, the time came when I took joy in the run of
the masthead and in the clinging on by my legs at that precarious height
while I swept the sea with glasses in search of the boats.

I remember one beautiful day, when the boats left early and the reports
of the hunters’ guns grew dim and distant and died away as they scattered
far and wide over the sea.  There was just the faintest wind from the
westward; but it breathed its last by the time we managed to get to
leeward of the last lee boat.  One by one—I was at the masthead and
saw—the six boats disappeared over the bulge of the earth as they
followed the seal into the west.  We lay, scarcely rolling on the placid
sea, unable to follow.  Wolf Larsen was apprehensive.  The barometer was
down, and the sky to the east did not please him.  He studied it with
unceasing vigilance.

“If she comes out of there,” he said, “hard and snappy, putting us to
windward of the boats, it’s likely there’ll be empty bunks in steerage
and fo’c’sle.”

By eleven o’clock the sea had become glass.  By midday, though we were
well up in the northerly latitudes, the heat was sickening.  There was no
freshness in the air.  It was sultry and oppressive, reminding me of what
the old Californians term “earthquake weather.”  There was something
ominous about it, and in intangible ways one was made to feel that the
worst was about to come.  Slowly the whole eastern sky filled with clouds
that over-towered us like some black sierra of the infernal regions.  So
clearly could one see cañon, gorge, and precipice, and the shadows that
lie therein, that one looked unconsciously for the white surf-line and
bellowing caverns where the sea charges on the land.  And still we rocked
gently, and there was no wind.

“It’s no square” Wolf Larsen said.  “Old Mother Nature’s going to get up
on her hind legs and howl for all that’s in her, and it’ll keep us
jumping, Hump, to pull through with half our boats.  You’d better run up
and loosen the topsails.”

“But if it is going to howl, and there are only two of us?” I asked, a
note of protest in my voice.

“Why we’ve got to make the best of the first of it and run down to our
boats before our canvas is ripped out of us.  After that I don’t give a
rap what happens.  The sticks ’ll stand it, and you and I will have to,
though we’ve plenty cut out for us.”

Still the calm continued.  We ate dinner, a hurried and anxious meal for
me with eighteen men abroad on the sea and beyond the bulge of the earth,
and with that heaven-rolling mountain range of clouds moving slowly down
upon us.  Wolf Larsen did not seem affected, however; though I noticed,
when we returned to the deck, a slight twitching of the nostrils, a
perceptible quickness of movement.  His face was stern, the lines of it
had grown hard, and yet in his eyes—blue, clear blue this day—there was a
strange brilliancy, a bright scintillating light.  It struck me that he
was joyous, in a ferocious sort of way; that he was glad there was an
impending struggle; that he was thrilled and upborne with knowledge that
one of the great moments of living, when the tide of life surges up in
flood, was upon him.

Once, and unwitting that he did so or that I saw, he laughed aloud,
mockingly and defiantly, at the advancing storm.  I see him yet standing
there like a pigmy out of the _Arabian Nights_ before the huge front of
some malignant genie.  He was daring destiny, and he was unafraid.

He walked to the galley.  “Cooky, by the time you’ve finished pots and
pans you’ll be wanted on deck.  Stand ready for a call.”

“Hump,” he said, becoming cognizant of the fascinated gaze I bent upon
him, “this beats whisky and is where your Omar misses.  I think he only
half lived after all.”

The western half of the sky had by now grown murky.  The sun had dimmed
and faded out of sight.  It was two in the afternoon, and a ghostly
twilight, shot through by wandering purplish lights, had descended upon
us.  In this purplish light Wolf Larsen’s face glowed and glowed, and to
my excited fancy he appeared encircled by a halo.  We lay in the midst of
an unearthly quiet, while all about us were signs and omens of oncoming
sound and movement.  The sultry heat had become unendurable.  The sweat
was standing on my forehead, and I could feel it trickling down my nose.
I felt as though I should faint, and reached out to the rail for support.

And then, just then, the faintest possible whisper of air passed by.  It
was from the east, and like a whisper it came and went.  The drooping
canvas was not stirred, and yet my face had felt the air and been cooled.

“Cooky,” Wolf Larsen called in a low voice.  Thomas Mugridge turned a
pitiable scared face.  “Let go that foreboom tackle and pass it across,
and when she’s willing let go the sheet and come in snug with the tackle.
And if you make a mess of it, it will be the last you ever make.
Understand?”

“Mr. Van Weyden, stand by to pass the head-sails over.  Then jump for the
topsails and spread them quick as God’ll let you—the quicker you do it
the easier you’ll find it.  As for Cooky, if he isn’t lively bat him
between the eyes.”

I was aware of the compliment and pleased, in that no threat had
accompanied my instructions.  We were lying head to north-west, and it
was his intention to jibe over all with the first puff.

“We’ll have the breeze on our quarter,” he explained to me.  “By the last
guns the boats were bearing away slightly to the south’ard.”

He turned and walked aft to the wheel.  I went forward and took my
station at the jibs.  Another whisper of wind, and another, passed by.
The canvas flapped lazily.

“Thank Gawd she’s not comin’ all of a bunch, Mr. Van Weyden,” was the
Cockney’s fervent ejaculation.

And I was indeed thankful, for I had by this time learned enough to know,
with all our canvas spread, what disaster in such event awaited us.  The
whispers of wind became puffs, the sails filled, the _Ghost_ moved.  Wolf
Larsen put the wheel hard up, to port, and we began to pay off.  The wind
was now dead astern, muttering and puffing stronger and stronger, and my
head-sails were pounding lustily.  I did not see what went on elsewhere,
though I felt the sudden surge and heel of the schooner as the
wind-pressures changed to the jibing of the fore- and main-sails.  My
hands were full with the flying-jib, jib, and staysail; and by the time
this part of my task was accomplished the _Ghost_ was leaping into the
south-west, the wind on her quarter and all her sheets to starboard.
Without pausing for breath, though my heart was beating like a
trip-hammer from my exertions, I sprang to the topsails, and before the
wind had become too strong we had them fairly set and were coiling down.
Then I went aft for orders.

Wolf Larsen nodded approval and relinquished the wheel to me.  The wind
was strengthening steadily and the sea rising.  For an hour I steered,
each moment becoming more difficult.  I had not the experience to steer
at the gait we were going on a quartering course.

“Now take a run up with the glasses and raise some of the boats.  We’ve
made at least ten knots, and we’re going twelve or thirteen now.  The old
girl knows how to walk.”

I contested myself with the fore crosstrees, some seventy feet above the
deck.  As I searched the vacant stretch of water before me, I
comprehended thoroughly the need for haste if we were to recover any of
our men.  Indeed, as I gazed at the heavy sea through which we were
running, I doubted that there was a boat afloat.  It did not seem
possible that such frail craft could survive such stress of wind and
water.

I could not feel the full force of the wind, for we were running with it;
but from my lofty perch I looked down as though outside the _Ghost_ and
apart from her, and saw the shape of her outlined sharply against the
foaming sea as she tore along instinct with life.  Sometimes she would
lift and send across some great wave, burying her starboard-rail from
view, and covering her deck to the hatches with the boiling ocean.  At
such moments, starting from a windward roll, I would go flying through
the air with dizzying swiftness, as though I clung to the end of a huge,
inverted pendulum, the arc of which, between the greater rolls, must have
been seventy feet or more.  Once, the terror of this giddy sweep
overpowered me, and for a while I clung on, hand and foot, weak and
trembling, unable to search the sea for the missing boats or to behold
aught of the sea but that which roared beneath and strove to overwhelm
the _Ghost_.

But the thought of the men in the midst of it steadied me, and in my
quest for them I forgot myself.  For an hour I saw nothing but the naked,
desolate sea.  And then, where a vagrant shaft of sunlight struck the
ocean and turned its surface to wrathful silver, I caught a small black
speck thrust skyward for an instant and swallowed up.  I waited
patiently.  Again the tiny point of black projected itself through the
wrathful blaze a couple of points off our port-bow.  I did not attempt to
shout, but communicated the news to Wolf Larsen by waving my arm.  He
changed the course, and I signalled affirmation when the speck showed
dead ahead.

It grew larger, and so swiftly that for the first time I fully
appreciated the speed of our flight.  Wolf Larsen motioned for me to come
down, and when I stood beside him at the wheel gave me instructions for
heaving to.

“Expect all hell to break loose,” he cautioned me, “but don’t mind it.
Yours is to do your own work and to have Cooky stand by the fore-sheet.”

I managed to make my way forward, but there was little choice of sides,
for the weather-rail seemed buried as often as the lee.  Having
instructed Thomas Mugridge as to what he was to do, I clambered into the
fore-rigging a few feet.  The boat was now very close, and I could make
out plainly that it was lying head to wind and sea and dragging on its
mast and sail, which had been thrown overboard and made to serve as a
sea-anchor.  The three men were bailing.  Each rolling mountain whelmed
them from view, and I would wait with sickening anxiety, fearing that
they would never appear again.  Then, and with black suddenness, the boat
would shoot clear through the foaming crest, bow pointed to the sky, and
the whole length of her bottom showing, wet and dark, till she seemed on
end.  There would be a fleeting glimpse of the three men flinging water
in frantic haste, when she would topple over and fall into the yawning
valley, bow down and showing her full inside length to the stern upreared
almost directly above the bow.  Each time that she reappeared was a
miracle.

The _Ghost_ suddenly changed her course, keeping away, and it came to me
with a shock that Wolf Larsen was giving up the rescue as impossible.
Then I realized that he was preparing to heave to, and dropped to the
deck to be in readiness.  We were now dead before the wind, the boat far
away and abreast of us.  I felt an abrupt easing of the schooner, a loss
for the moment of all strain and pressure, coupled with a swift
acceleration of speed.  She was rushing around on her heel into the wind.

As she arrived at right angles to the sea, the full force of the wind
(from which we had hitherto run away) caught us.  I was unfortunately and
ignorantly facing it.  It stood up against me like a wall, filling my
lungs with air which I could not expel.  And as I choked and strangled,
and as the _Ghost_ wallowed for an instant, broadside on and rolling
straight over and far into the wind, I beheld a huge sea rise far above
my head.  I turned aside, caught my breath, and looked again.  The wave
over-topped the _Ghost_, and I gazed sheer up and into it.  A shaft of
sunlight smote the over-curl, and I caught a glimpse of translucent,
rushing green, backed by a milky smother of foam.

Then it descended, pandemonium broke loose, everything happened at once.
I was struck a crushing, stunning blow, nowhere in particular and yet
everywhere.  My hold had been broken loose, I was under water, and the
thought passed through my mind that this was the terrible thing of which
I had heard, the being swept in the trough of the sea.  My body struck
and pounded as it was dashed helplessly along and turned over and over,
and when I could hold my breath no longer, I breathed the stinging salt
water into my lungs.  But through it all I clung to the one idea—_I must
get the jib backed over to windward_.  I had no fear of death.  I had no
doubt but that I should come through somehow.  And as this idea of
fulfilling Wolf Larsen’s order persisted in my dazed consciousness, I
seemed to see him standing at the wheel in the midst of the wild welter,
pitting his will against the will of the storm and defying it.

I brought up violently against what I took to be the rail, breathed, and
breathed the sweet air again.  I tried to rise, but struck my head and
was knocked back on hands and knees.  By some freak of the waters I had
been swept clear under the forecastle-head and into the eyes.  As I
scrambled out on all fours, I passed over the body of Thomas Mugridge,
who lay in a groaning heap.  There was no time to investigate.  I must
get the jib backed over.

When I emerged on deck it seemed that the end of everything had come.  On
all sides there was a rending and crashing of wood and steel and canvas.
The _Ghost_ was being wrenched and torn to fragments.  The foresail and
fore-topsail, emptied of the wind by the manœuvre, and with no one to
bring in the sheet in time, were thundering into ribbons, the heavy boom
threshing and splintering from rail to rail.  The air was thick with
flying wreckage, detached ropes and stays were hissing and coiling like
snakes, and down through it all crashed the gaff of the foresail.

The spar could not have missed me by many inches, while it spurred me to
action.  Perhaps the situation was not hopeless.  I remembered Wolf
Larsen’s caution.  He had expected all hell to break loose, and here it
was.  And where was he?  I caught sight of him toiling at the main-sheet,
heaving it in and flat with his tremendous muscles, the stern of the
schooner lifted high in the air and his body outlined against a white
surge of sea sweeping past.  All this, and more,—a whole world of chaos
and wreck,—in possibly fifteen seconds I had seen and heard and grasped.

I did not stop to see what had become of the small boat, but sprang to
the jib-sheet.  The jib itself was beginning to slap, partially filling
and emptying with sharp reports; but with a turn of the sheet and the
application of my whole strength each time it slapped, I slowly backed
it.  This I know: I did my best.  I pulled till I burst open the ends of
all my fingers; and while I pulled, the flying-jib and staysail split
their cloths apart and thundered into nothingness.

Still I pulled, holding what I gained each time with a double turn until
the next slap gave me more.  Then the sheet gave with greater ease, and
Wolf Larsen was beside me, heaving in alone while I was busied taking up
the slack.

“Make fast!” he shouted.  “And come on!”

As I followed him, I noted that in spite of rack and ruin a rough order
obtained.  The _Ghost_ was hove to.  She was still in working order, and
she was still working.  Though the rest of her sails were gone, the jib,
backed to windward, and the mainsail hauled down flat, were themselves
holding, and holding her bow to the furious sea as well.

I looked for the boat, and, while Wolf Larsen cleared the boat-tackles,
saw it lift to leeward on a big sea an not a score of feet away.  And, so
nicely had he made his calculation, we drifted fairly down upon it, so
that nothing remained to do but hook the tackles to either end and hoist
it aboard.  But this was not done so easily as it is written.

In the bow was Kerfoot, Oofty-Oofty in the stern, and Kelly amidships.
As we drifted closer the boat would rise on a wave while we sank in the
trough, till almost straight above me I could see the heads of the three
men craned overside and looking down.  Then, the next moment, we would
lift and soar upward while they sank far down beneath us.  It seemed
incredible that the next surge should not crush the _Ghost_ down upon the
tiny eggshell.

But, at the right moment, I passed the tackle to the Kanaka, while Wolf
Larsen did the same thing forward to Kerfoot.  Both tackles were hooked
in a trice, and the three men, deftly timing the roll, made a
simultaneous leap aboard the schooner.  As the _Ghost_ rolled her side
out of water, the boat was lifted snugly against her, and before the
return roll came, we had heaved it in over the side and turned it bottom
up on the deck.  I noticed blood spouting from Kerfoot’s left hand.  In
some way the third finger had been crushed to a pulp.  But he gave no
sign of pain, and with his single right hand helped us lash the boat in
its place.

“Stand by to let that jib over, you Oofty!” Wolf Larsen commanded, the
very second we had finished with the boat.  “Kelly, come aft and slack
off the main-sheet!  You, Kerfoot, go for’ard and see what’s become of
Cooky!  Mr. Van Weyden, run aloft again, and cut away any stray stuff on
your way!”

And having commanded, he went aft with his peculiar tigerish leaps to the
wheel.  While I toiled up the fore-shrouds the _Ghost_ slowly paid off.
This time, as we went into the trough of the sea and were swept, there
were no sails to carry away.  And, halfway to the crosstrees and
flattened against the rigging by the full force of the wind so that it
would have been impossible for me to have fallen, the _Ghost_ almost on
her beam-ends and the masts parallel with the water, I looked, not down,
but at almost right angles from the perpendicular, to the deck of the
_Ghost_.  But I saw, not the deck, but where the deck should have been,
for it was buried beneath a wild tumbling of water.  Out of this water I
could see the two masts rising, and that was all.  The _Ghost_, for the
moment, was buried beneath the sea.  As she squared off more and more,
escaping from the side pressure, she righted herself and broke her deck,
like a whale’s back, through the ocean surface.

Then we raced, and wildly, across the wild sea, the while I hung like a
fly in the crosstrees and searched for the other boats.  In half-an-hour
I sighted the second one, swamped and bottom up, to which were
desperately clinging Jock Horner, fat Louis, and Johnson.  This time I
remained aloft, and Wolf Larsen succeeded in heaving to without being
swept.  As before, we drifted down upon it.  Tackles were made fast and
lines flung to the men, who scrambled aboard like monkeys.  The boat
itself was crushed and splintered against the schooner’s side as it came
inboard; but the wreck was securely lashed, for it could be patched and
made whole again.

Once more the _Ghost_ bore away before the storm, this time so submerging
herself that for some seconds I thought she would never reappear.  Even
the wheel, quite a deal higher than the waist, was covered and swept
again and again.  At such moments I felt strangely alone with God, alone
with him and watching the chaos of his wrath.  And then the wheel would
reappear, and Wolf Larsen’s broad shoulders, his hands gripping the
spokes and holding the schooner to the course of his will, himself an
earth-god, dominating the storm, flinging its descending waters from him
and riding it to his own ends.  And oh, the marvel of it! the marvel of
it!  That tiny men should live and breathe and work, and drive so frail a
contrivance of wood and cloth through so tremendous an elemental strife.

As before, the _Ghost_ swung out of the trough, lifting her deck again
out of the sea, and dashed before the howling blast.  It was now
half-past five, and half-an-hour later, when the last of the day lost
itself in a dim and furious twilight, I sighted a third boat.  It was
bottom up, and there was no sign of its crew.  Wolf Larsen repeated his
manœuvre, holding off and then rounding up to windward and drifting down
upon it.  But this time he missed by forty feet, the boat passing astern.

“Number four boat!” Oofty-Oofty cried, his keen eyes reading its number
in the one second when it lifted clear of the foam, and upside down.

It was Henderson’s boat and with him had been lost Holyoak and Williams,
another of the deep-water crowd.  Lost they indubitably were; but the
boat remained, and Wolf Larsen made one more reckless effort to recover
it.  I had come down to the deck, and I saw Horner and Kerfoot vainly
protest against the attempt.

“By God, I’ll not be robbed of my boat by any storm that ever blew out of
hell!” he shouted, and though we four stood with our heads together that
we might hear, his voice seemed faint and far, as though removed from us
an immense distance.

“Mr. Van Weyden!” he cried, and I heard through the tumult as one might
hear a whisper.  “Stand by that jib with Johnson and Oofty!  The rest of
you tail aft to the mainsheet!  Lively now! or I’ll sail you all into
Kingdom Come!  Understand?”

And when he put the wheel hard over and the _Ghost’s_ bow swung off,
there was nothing for the hunters to do but obey and make the best of a
risky chance.  How great the risk I realized when I was once more buried
beneath the pounding seas and clinging for life to the pinrail at the
foot of the foremast.  My fingers were torn loose, and I swept across to
the side and over the side into the sea.  I could not swim, but before I
could sink I was swept back again.  A strong hand gripped me, and when
the _Ghost_ finally emerged, I found that I owed my life to Johnson.  I
saw him looking anxiously about him, and noted that Kelly, who had come
forward at the last moment, was missing.

This time, having missed the boat, and not being in the same position as
in the previous instances, Wolf Larsen was compelled to resort to a
different manœuvre.  Running off before the wind with everything to
starboard, he came about, and returned close-hauled on the port tack.

“Grand!” Johnson shouted in my ear, as we successfully came through the
attendant deluge, and I knew he referred, not to Wolf Larsen’s
seamanship, but to the performance of the _Ghost_ herself.

It was now so dark that there was no sign of the boat; but Wolf Larsen
held back through the frightful turmoil as if guided by unerring
instinct.  This time, though we were continually half-buried, there was
no trough in which to be swept, and we drifted squarely down upon the
upturned boat, badly smashing it as it was heaved inboard.

Two hours of terrible work followed, in which all hands of us—two
hunters, three sailors, Wolf Larsen and I—reefed, first one and then the
other, the jib and mainsail.  Hove to under this short canvas, our decks
were comparatively free of water, while the _Ghost_ bobbed and ducked
amongst the combers like a cork.

I had burst open the ends of my fingers at the very first, and during the
reefing I had worked with tears of pain running down my cheeks.  And when
all was done, I gave up like a woman and rolled upon the deck in the
agony of exhaustion.

In the meantime Thomas Mugridge, like a drowned rat, was being dragged
out from under the forecastle head where he had cravenly ensconced
himself.  I saw him pulled aft to the cabin, and noted with a shock of
surprise that the galley had disappeared.  A clean space of deck showed
where it had stood.

In the cabin I found all hands assembled, sailors as well, and while
coffee was being cooked over the small stove we drank whisky and crunched
hard-tack.  Never in my life had food been so welcome.  And never had hot
coffee tasted so good.  So violently did the _Ghost_, pitch and toss and
tumble that it was impossible for even the sailors to move about without
holding on, and several times, after a cry of “Now she takes it!” we were
heaped upon the wall of the port cabins as though it had been the deck.

“To hell with a look-out,” I heard Wolf Larsen say when we had eaten and
drunk our fill.  “There’s nothing can be done on deck.  If anything’s
going to run us down we couldn’t get out of its way.  Turn in, all hands,
and get some sleep.”

The sailors slipped forward, setting the side-lights as they went, while
the two hunters remained to sleep in the cabin, it not being deemed
advisable to open the slide to the steerage companion-way.  Wolf Larsen
and I, between us, cut off Kerfoot’s crushed finger and sewed up the
stump.  Mugridge, who, during all the time he had been compelled to cook
and serve coffee and keep the fire going, had complained of internal
pains, now swore that he had a broken rib or two.  On examination we
found that he had three.  But his case was deferred to next day,
principally for the reason that I did not know anything about broken ribs
and would first have to read it up.

“I don’t think it was worth it,” I said to Wolf Larsen, “a broken boat
for Kelly’s life.”

“But Kelly didn’t amount to much,” was the reply.  “Good-night.”

After all that had passed, suffering intolerable anguish in my
finger-ends, and with three boats missing, to say nothing of the wild
capers the _Ghost_ was cutting, I should have thought it impossible to
sleep.  But my eyes must have closed the instant my head touched the
pillow, and in utter exhaustion I slept throughout the night, the while
the _Ghost_, lonely and undirected, fought her way through the storm.




CHAPTER XVIII


The next day, while the storm was blowing itself out, Wolf Larsen and I
crammed anatomy and surgery and set Mugridge’s ribs.  Then, when the
storm broke, Wolf Larsen cruised back and forth over that portion of the
ocean where we had encountered it, and somewhat more to the westward,
while the boats were being repaired and new sails made and bent.  Sealing
schooner after sealing schooner we sighted and boarded, most of which
were in search of lost boats, and most of which were carrying boats and
crews they had picked up and which did not belong to them.  For the thick
of the fleet had been to the westward of us, and the boats, scattered far
and wide, had headed in mad flight for the nearest refuge.

Two of our boats, with men all safe, we took off the _Cisco_, and, to
Wolf Larsen’s huge delight and my own grief, he culled Smoke, with Nilson
and Leach, from the _San Diego_.  So that, at the end of five days, we
found ourselves short but four men—Henderson, Holyoak, Williams, and
Kelly,—and were once more hunting on the flanks of the herd.

As we followed it north we began to encounter the dreaded sea-fogs.  Day
after day the boats lowered and were swallowed up almost ere they touched
the water, while we on board pumped the horn at regular intervals and
every fifteen minutes fired the bomb gun.  Boats were continually being
lost and found, it being the custom for a boat to hunt, on lay, with
whatever schooner picked it up, until such time it was recovered by its
own schooner.  But Wolf Larsen, as was to be expected, being a boat
short, took possession of the first stray one and compelled its men to
hunt with the _Ghost_, not permitting them to return to their own
schooner when we sighted it.  I remember how he forced the hunter and his
two men below, a rifle at their breasts, when their captain passed by at
biscuit-toss and hailed us for information.

Thomas Mugridge, so strangely and pertinaciously clinging to life, was
soon limping about again and performing his double duties of cook and
cabin-boy.  Johnson and Leach were bullied and beaten as much as ever,
and they looked for their lives to end with the end of the hunting
season; while the rest of the crew lived the lives of dogs and were
worked like dogs by their pitiless master.  As for Wolf Larsen and
myself, we got along fairly well; though I could not quite rid myself of
the idea that right conduct, for me, lay in killing him.  He fascinated
me immeasurably, and I feared him immeasurably.  And yet, I could not
imagine him lying prone in death.  There was an endurance, as of
perpetual youth, about him, which rose up and forbade the picture.  I
could see him only as living always, and dominating always, fighting and
destroying, himself surviving.

One diversion of his, when we were in the midst of the herd and the sea
was too rough to lower the boats, was to lower with two boat-pullers and
a steerer and go out himself.  He was a good shot, too, and brought many
a skin aboard under what the hunters termed impossible hunting
conditions.  It seemed the breath of his nostrils, this carrying his life
in his hands and struggling for it against tremendous odds.

I was learning more and more seamanship; and one clear day—a thing we
rarely encountered now—I had the satisfaction of running and handling the
_Ghost_ and picking up the boats myself.  Wolf Larsen had been smitten
with one of his headaches, and I stood at the wheel from morning until
evening, sailing across the ocean after the last lee boat, and heaving to
and picking it and the other five up without command or suggestion from
him.

Gales we encountered now and again, for it was a raw and stormy region,
and, in the middle of June, a typhoon most memorable to me and most
important because of the changes wrought through it upon my future.  We
must have been caught nearly at the centre of this circular storm, and
Wolf Larsen ran out of it and to the southward, first under a
double-reefed jib, and finally under bare poles.  Never had I imagined so
great a sea.  The seas previously encountered were as ripples compared
with these, which ran a half-mile from crest to crest and which upreared,
I am confident, above our masthead.  So great was it that Wolf Larsen
himself did not dare heave to, though he was being driven far to the
southward and out of the seal herd.

We must have been well in the path of the trans-Pacific steamships when
the typhoon moderated, and here, to the surprise of the hunters, we found
ourselves in the midst of seals—a second herd, or sort of rear-guard,
they declared, and a most unusual thing.  But it was “Boats over!” the
boom-boom of guns, and the pitiful slaughter through the long day.

It was at this time that I was approached by Leach.  I had just finished
tallying the skins of the last boat aboard, when he came to my side, in
the darkness, and said in a low tone:

“Can you tell me, Mr. Van Weyden, how far we are off the coast, and what
the bearings of Yokohama are?”

My heart leaped with gladness, for I knew what he had in mind, and I gave
him the bearings—west-north-west, and five hundred miles away.

“Thank you, sir,” was all he said as he slipped back into the darkness.

Next morning No. 3 boat and Johnson and Leach were missing.  The
water-breakers and grub-boxes from all the other boats were likewise
missing, as were the beds and sea bags of the two men.  Wolf Larsen was
furious.  He set sail and bore away into the west-north-west, two hunters
constantly at the mastheads and sweeping the sea with glasses, himself
pacing the deck like an angry lion.  He knew too well my sympathy for the
runaways to send me aloft as look-out.

The wind was fair but fitful, and it was like looking for a needle in a
haystack to raise that tiny boat out of the blue immensity.  But he put
the _Ghost_ through her best paces so as to get between the deserters and
the land.  This accomplished, he cruised back and forth across what he
knew must be their course.

On the morning of the third day, shortly after eight bells, a cry that
the boat was sighted came down from Smoke at the masthead.  All hands
lined the rail.  A snappy breeze was blowing from the west with the
promise of more wind behind it; and there, to leeward, in the troubled
silver of the rising sun, appeared and disappeared a black speck.

We squared away and ran for it.  My heart was as lead.  I felt myself
turning sick in anticipation; and as I looked at the gleam of triumph in
Wolf Larsen’s eyes, his form swam before me, and I felt almost
irresistibly impelled to fling myself upon him.  So unnerved was I by the
thought of impending violence to Leach and Johnson that my reason must
have left me.  I know that I slipped down into the steerage in a daze,
and that I was just beginning the ascent to the deck, a loaded shot-gun
in my hands, when I heard the startled cry:

“There’s five men in that boat!”

I supported myself in the companion-way, weak and trembling, while the
observation was being verified by the remarks of the rest of the men.
Then my knees gave from under me and I sank down, myself again, but
overcome by shock at knowledge of what I had so nearly done.  Also, I was
very thankful as I put the gun away and slipped back on deck.

No one had remarked my absence.  The boat was near enough for us to make
out that it was larger than any sealing boat and built on different
lines.  As we drew closer, the sail was taken in and the mast unstepped.
Oars were shipped, and its occupants waited for us to heave to and take
them aboard.

Smoke, who had descended to the deck and was now standing by my side,
began to chuckle in a significant way.  I looked at him inquiringly.

“Talk of a mess!” he giggled.

“What’s wrong?” I demanded.

Again he chuckled.  “Don’t you see there, in the stern-sheets, on the
bottom?  May I never shoot a seal again if that ain’t a woman!”

I looked closely, but was not sure until exclamations broke out on all
sides.  The boat contained four men, and its fifth occupant was certainly
a woman.  We were agog with excitement, all except Wolf Larsen, who was
too evidently disappointed in that it was not his own boat with the two
victims of his malice.

We ran down the flying jib, hauled the jib-sheets to wind-ward and the
main-sheet flat, and came up into the wind.  The oars struck the water,
and with a few strokes the boat was alongside.  I now caught my first
fair glimpse of the woman.  She was wrapped in a long ulster, for the
morning was raw; and I could see nothing but her face and a mass of light
brown hair escaping from under the seaman’s cap on her head.  The eyes
were large and brown and lustrous, the mouth sweet and sensitive, and the
face itself a delicate oval, though sun and exposure to briny wind had
burnt the face scarlet.

She seemed to me like a being from another world.  I was aware of a
hungry out-reaching for her, as of a starving man for bread.  But then, I
had not seen a woman for a very long time.  I know that I was lost in a
great wonder, almost a stupor,—this, then, was a woman?—so that I forgot
myself and my mate’s duties, and took no part in helping the new-comers
aboard.  For when one of the sailors lifted her into Wolf Larsen’s
downstretched arms, she looked up into our curious faces and smiled
amusedly and sweetly, as only a woman can smile, and as I had seen no one
smile for so long that I had forgotten such smiles existed.

“Mr. Van Weyden!”

Wolf Larsen’s voice brought me sharply back to myself.

“Will you take the lady below and see to her comfort?  Make up that spare
port cabin.  Put Cooky to work on it.  And see what you can do for that
face.  It’s burned badly.”

He turned brusquely away from us and began to question the new men.  The
boat was cast adrift, though one of them called it a “bloody shame” with
Yokohama so near.

I found myself strangely afraid of this woman I was escorting aft.  Also
I was awkward.  It seemed to me that I was realizing for the first time
what a delicate, fragile creature a woman is; and as I caught her arm to
help her down the companion stairs, I was startled by its smallness and
softness.  Indeed, she was a slender, delicate woman as women go, but to
me she was so ethereally slender and delicate that I was quite prepared
for her arm to crumble in my grasp.  All this, in frankness, to show my
first impression, after long denial of women in general and of Maud
Brewster in particular.

“No need to go to any great trouble for me,” she protested, when I had
seated her in Wolf Larsen’s arm-chair, which I had dragged hastily from
his cabin.  “The men were looking for land at any moment this morning,
and the vessel should be in by night; don’t you think so?”

Her simple faith in the immediate future took me aback.  How could I
explain to her the situation, the strange man who stalked the sea like
Destiny, all that it had taken me months to learn?  But I answered
honestly:

“If it were any other captain except ours, I should say you would be
ashore in Yokohama to-morrow.  But our captain is a strange man, and I
beg of you to be prepared for anything—understand?—for anything.”

“I—I confess I hardly do understand,” she hesitated, a perturbed but not
frightened expression in her eyes.  “Or is it a misconception of mine
that shipwrecked people are always shown every consideration?  This is
such a little thing, you know.  We are so close to land.”

“Candidly, I do not know,” I strove to reassure her.  “I wished merely to
prepare you for the worst, if the worst is to come.  This man, this
captain, is a brute, a demon, and one can never tell what will be his
next fantastic act.”

I was growing excited, but she interrupted me with an “Oh, I see,” and
her voice sounded weary.  To think was patently an effort.  She was
clearly on the verge of physical collapse.

She asked no further questions, and I vouchsafed no remark, devoting
myself to Wolf Larsen’s command, which was to make her comfortable.  I
bustled about in quite housewifely fashion, procuring soothing lotions
for her sunburn, raiding Wolf Larsen’s private stores for a bottle of
port I knew to be there, and directing Thomas Mugridge in the preparation
of the spare state-room.

The wind was freshening rapidly, the _Ghost_ heeling over more and more,
and by the time the state-room was ready she was dashing through the
water at a lively clip.  I had quite forgotten the existence of Leach and
Johnson, when suddenly, like a thunderclap, “Boat ho!” came down the open
companion-way.  It was Smoke’s unmistakable voice, crying from the
masthead.  I shot a glance at the woman, but she was leaning back in the
arm-chair, her eyes closed, unutterably tired.  I doubted that she had
heard, and I resolved to prevent her seeing the brutality I knew would
follow the capture of the deserters.  She was tired.  Very good.  She
should sleep.

There were swift commands on deck, a stamping of feet and a slapping of
reef-points as the _Ghost_ shot into the wind and about on the other
tack.  As she filled away and heeled, the arm-chair began to slide across
the cabin floor, and I sprang for it just in time to prevent the rescued
woman from being spilled out.

Her eyes were too heavy to suggest more than a hint of the sleepy
surprise that perplexed her as she looked up at me, and she half
stumbled, half tottered, as I led her to her cabin.  Mugridge grinned
insinuatingly in my face as I shoved him out and ordered him back to his
galley work; and he won his revenge by spreading glowing reports among
the hunters as to what an excellent “lydy’s-myde” I was proving myself to
be.

She leaned heavily against me, and I do believe that she had fallen
asleep again between the arm-chair and the state-room.  This I discovered
when she nearly fell into the bunk during a sudden lurch of the schooner.
She aroused, smiled drowsily, and was off to sleep again; and asleep I
left her, under a heavy pair of sailor’s blankets, her head resting on a
pillow I had appropriated from Wolf Larsen’s bunk.




CHAPTER XIX


I came on deck to find the _Ghost_ heading up close on the port tack and
cutting in to windward of a familiar spritsail close-hauled on the same
tack ahead of us.  All hands were on deck, for they knew that something
was to happen when Leach and Johnson were dragged aboard.

It was four bells.  Louis came aft to relieve the wheel.  There was a
dampness in the air, and I noticed he had on his oilskins.

“What are we going to have?” I asked him.

“A healthy young slip of a gale from the breath iv it, sir,” he answered,
“with a splatter iv rain just to wet our gills an’ no more.”

“Too bad we sighted them,” I said, as the _Ghost’s_ bow was flung off a
point by a large sea and the boat leaped for a moment past the jibs and
into our line of vision.

Louis gave a spoke and temporized.  “They’d never iv made the land, sir,
I’m thinkin’.”

“Think not?” I queried.

“No, sir.  Did you feel that?”  (A puff had caught the schooner, and he
was forced to put the wheel up rapidly to keep her out of the wind.)
“’Tis no egg-shell’ll float on this sea an hour come, an’ it’s a stroke
iv luck for them we’re here to pick ’em up.”

Wolf Larsen strode aft from amidships, where he had been talking with the
rescued men.  The cat-like springiness in his tread was a little more
pronounced than usual, and his eyes were bright and snappy.

“Three oilers and a fourth engineer,” was his greeting.  “But we’ll make
sailors out of them, or boat-pullers at any rate.  Now, what of the
lady?”

I know not why, but I was aware of a twinge or pang like the cut of a
knife when he mentioned her.  I thought it a certain silly fastidiousness
on my part, but it persisted in spite of me, and I merely shrugged my
shoulders in answer.

Wolf Larsen pursed his lips in a long, quizzical whistle.

“What’s her name, then?” he demanded.

“I don’t know,” I replied.  “She is asleep.  She was very tired.  In
fact, I am waiting to hear the news from you.  What vessel was it?”

“Mail steamer,” he answered shortly.  “_The City of Tokio_, from ’Frisco,
bound for Yokohama.  Disabled in that typhoon.  Old tub.  Opened up top
and bottom like a sieve.  They were adrift four days.  And you don’t know
who or what she is, eh?—maid, wife, or widow?  Well, well.”

He shook his head in a bantering way, and regarded me with laughing eyes.

“Are you—” I began.  It was on the verge of my tongue to ask if he were
going to take the castaways into Yokohama.

“Am I what?” he asked.

“What do you intend doing with Leach and Johnson?”

He shook his head.  “Really, Hump, I don’t know.  You see, with these
additions I’ve about all the crew I want.”

“And they’ve about all the escaping they want,” I said.  “Why not give
them a change of treatment?  Take them aboard, and deal gently with them.
Whatever they have done they have been hounded into doing.”

“By me?”

“By you,” I answered steadily.  “And I give you warning, Wolf Larsen,
that I may forget love of my own life in the desire to kill you if you go
too far in maltreating those poor wretches.”

“Bravo!” he cried.  “You do me proud, Hump!  You’ve found your legs with
a vengeance.  You’re quite an individual.  You were unfortunate in having
your life cast in easy places, but you’re developing, and I like you the
better for it.”

His voice and expression changed.  His face was serious.  “Do you believe
in promises?” he asked.  “Are they sacred things?”

“Of course,” I answered.

“Then here’s a compact,” he went on, consummate actor.  “If I promise not
to lay my hands upon Leach will you promise, in turn, not to attempt to
kill me?”

“Oh, not that I’m afraid of you, not that I’m afraid of you,” he hastened
to add.

I could hardly believe my ears.  What was coming over the man?

“Is it a go?” he asked impatiently.

“A go,” I answered.

His hand went out to mine, and as I shook it heartily I could have sworn
I saw the mocking devil shine up for a moment in his eyes.

We strolled across the poop to the lee side.  The boat was close at hand
now, and in desperate plight.  Johnson was steering, Leach bailing.  We
overhauled them about two feet to their one.  Wolf Larsen motioned Louis
to keep off slightly, and we dashed abreast of the boat, not a score of
feet to windward.  The _Ghost_ blanketed it.  The spritsail flapped
emptily and the boat righted to an even keel, causing the two men swiftly
to change position.  The boat lost headway, and, as we lifted on a huge
surge, toppled and fell into the trough.

It was at this moment that Leach and Johnson looked up into the faces of
their shipmates, who lined the rail amidships.  There was no greeting.
They were as dead men in their comrades’ eyes, and between them was the
gulf that parts the living and the dead.

The next instant they were opposite the poop, where stood Wolf Larsen and
I.  We were falling in the trough, they were rising on the surge.
Johnson looked at me, and I could see that his face was worn and haggard.
I waved my hand to him, and he answered the greeting, but with a wave
that was hopeless and despairing.  It was as if he were saying farewell.
I did not see into the eyes of Leach, for he was looking at Wolf Larsen,
the old and implacable snarl of hatred strong as ever on his face.

Then they were gone astern.  The spritsail filled with the wind,
suddenly, careening the frail open craft till it seemed it would surely
capsize.  A whitecap foamed above it and broke across in a snow-white
smother.  Then the boat emerged, half swamped, Leach flinging the water
out and Johnson clinging to the steering-oar, his face white and anxious.

Wolf Larsen barked a short laugh in my ear and strode away to the weather
side of the poop.  I expected him to give orders for the _Ghost_ to heave
to, but she kept on her course and he made no sign.  Louis stood
imperturbably at the wheel, but I noticed the grouped sailors forward
turning troubled faces in our direction.  Still the _Ghost_ tore along,
till the boat dwindled to a speck, when Wolf Larsen’s voice rang out in
command and he went about on the starboard tack.

Back we held, two miles and more to windward of the struggling
cockle-shell, when the flying jib was run down and the schooner hove to.
The sealing boats are not made for windward work.  Their hope lies in
keeping a weather position so that they may run before the wind for the
schooner when it breezes up.  But in all that wild waste there was no
refuge for Leach and Johnson save on the _Ghost_, and they resolutely
began the windward beat.  It was slow work in the heavy sea that was
running.  At any moment they were liable to be overwhelmed by the hissing
combers.  Time and again and countless times we watched the boat luff
into the big whitecaps, lose headway, and be flung back like a cork.

Johnson was a splendid seaman, and he knew as much about small boats as
he did about ships.  At the end of an hour and a half he was nearly
alongside, standing past our stern on the last leg out, aiming to fetch
us on the next leg back.

“So you’ve changed your mind?” I heard Wolf Larsen mutter, half to
himself, half to them as though they could hear.  “You want to come
aboard, eh?  Well, then, just keep a-coming.”

“Hard up with that helm!” he commanded Oofty-Oofty, the Kanaka, who had
in the meantime relieved Louis at the wheel.

Command followed command.  As the schooner paid off, the fore- and
main-sheets were slacked away for fair wind.  And before the wind we
were, and leaping, when Johnson, easing his sheet at imminent peril, cut
across our wake a hundred feet away.  Again Wolf Larsen laughed, at the
same time beckoning them with his arm to follow.  It was evidently his
intention to play with them,—a lesson, I took it, in lieu of a beating,
though a dangerous lesson, for the frail craft stood in momentary danger
of being overwhelmed.

Johnson squared away promptly and ran after us.  There was nothing else
for him to do.  Death stalked everywhere, and it was only a matter of
time when some one of those many huge seas would fall upon the boat, roll
over it, and pass on.

“’Tis the fear iv death at the hearts iv them,” Louis muttered in my ear,
as I passed forward to see to taking in the flying jib and staysail.

“Oh, he’ll heave to in a little while and pick them up,” I answered
cheerfully.  “He’s bent upon giving them a lesson, that’s all.”

Louis looked at me shrewdly.  “Think so?” he asked.

“Surely,” I answered.  “Don’t you?”

“I think nothing but iv my own skin, these days,” was his answer.  “An’
’tis with wonder I’m filled as to the workin’ out iv things.  A pretty
mess that ’Frisco whisky got me into, an’ a prettier mess that woman’s
got you into aft there.  Ah, it’s myself that knows ye for a blitherin’
fool.”

“What do you mean?” I demanded; for, having sped his shaft, he was
turning away.

“What do I mean?” he cried.  “And it’s you that asks me!  ’Tis not what I
mean, but what the Wolf ’ll mean.  The Wolf, I said, the Wolf!”

“If trouble comes, will you stand by?” I asked impulsively, for he had
voiced my own fear.

“Stand by?  ’Tis old fat Louis I stand by, an’ trouble enough it’ll be.
We’re at the beginnin’ iv things, I’m tellin’ ye, the bare beginnin’ iv
things.”

“I had not thought you so great a coward,” I sneered.

He favoured me with a contemptuous stare.  “If I raised never a hand for
that poor fool,”—pointing astern to the tiny sail,—“d’ye think I’m
hungerin’ for a broken head for a woman I never laid me eyes upon before
this day?”

I turned scornfully away and went aft.

“Better get in those topsails, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen said, as I
came on the poop.

I felt relief, at least as far as the two men were concerned.  It was
clear he did not wish to run too far away from them.  I picked up hope at
the thought and put the order swiftly into execution.  I had scarcely
opened my mouth to issue the necessary commands, when eager men were
springing to halyards and downhauls, and others were racing aloft.  This
eagerness on their part was noted by Wolf Larsen with a grim smile.

Still we increased our lead, and when the boat had dropped astern several
miles we hove to and waited.  All eyes watched it coming, even Wolf
Larsen’s; but he was the only unperturbed man aboard.  Louis, gazing
fixedly, betrayed a trouble in his face he was not quite able to hide.

The boat drew closer and closer, hurling along through the seething green
like a thing alive, lifting and sending and uptossing across the
huge-backed breakers, or disappearing behind them only to rush into sight
again and shoot skyward.  It seemed impossible that it could continue to
live, yet with each dizzying sweep it did achieve the impossible.  A
rain-squall drove past, and out of the flying wet the boat emerged,
almost upon us.

“Hard up, there!” Wolf Larsen shouted, himself springing to the wheel and
whirling it over.

Again the _Ghost_ sprang away and raced before the wind, and for two
hours Johnson and Leach pursued us.  We hove to and ran away, hove to and
ran away, and ever astern the struggling patch of sail tossed skyward and
fell into the rushing valleys.  It was a quarter of a mile away when a
thick squall of rain veiled it from view.  It never emerged.  The wind
blew the air clear again, but no patch of sail broke the troubled
surface.  I thought I saw, for an instant, the boat’s bottom show black
in a breaking crest.  At the best, that was all.  For Johnson and Leach
the travail of existence had ceased.

The men remained grouped amidships.  No one had gone below, and no one
was speaking.  Nor were any looks being exchanged.  Each man seemed
stunned—deeply contemplative, as it were, and, not quite sure, trying to
realize just what had taken place.  Wolf Larsen gave them little time for
thought.  He at once put the _Ghost_ upon her course—a course which meant
the seal herd and not Yokohama harbour.  But the men were no longer eager
as they pulled and hauled, and I heard curses amongst them, which left
their lips smothered and as heavy and lifeless as were they.  Not so was
it with the hunters.  Smoke the irrepressible related a story, and they
descended into the steerage, bellowing with laughter.

As I passed to leeward of the galley on my way aft I was approached by
the engineer we had rescued.  His face was white, his lips were
trembling.

“Good God! sir, what kind of a craft is this?” he cried.

“You have eyes, you have seen,” I answered, almost brutally, what of the
pain and fear at my own heart.

“Your promise?” I said to Wolf Larsen.

“I was not thinking of taking them aboard when I made that promise,” he
answered.  “And anyway, you’ll agree I’ve not laid my hands upon them.”

“Far from it, far from it,” he laughed a moment later.

I made no reply.  I was incapable of speaking, my mind was too confused.
I must have time to think, I knew.  This woman, sleeping even now in the
spare cabin, was a responsibility, which I must consider, and the only
rational thought that flickered through my mind was that I must do
nothing hastily if I were to be any help to her at all.




CHAPTER XX


The remainder of the day passed uneventfully.  The young slip of a gale,
having wetted our gills, proceeded to moderate.  The fourth engineer and
the three oilers, after a warm interview with Wolf Larsen, were furnished
with outfits from the slop-chests, assigned places under the hunters in
the various boats and watches on the vessel, and bundled forward into the
forecastle.  They went protestingly, but their voices were not loud.
They were awed by what they had already seen of Wolf Larsen’s character,
while the tale of woe they speedily heard in the forecastle took the last
bit of rebellion out of them.

Miss Brewster—we had learned her name from the engineer—slept on and on.
At supper I requested the hunters to lower their voices, so she was not
disturbed; and it was not till next morning that she made her appearance.
It had been my intention to have her meals served apart, but Wolf Larsen
put down his foot.  Who was she that she should be too good for cabin
table and cabin society? had been his demand.

But her coming to the table had something amusing in it.  The hunters
fell silent as clams.  Jock Horner and Smoke alone were unabashed,
stealing stealthy glances at her now and again, and even taking part in
the conversation.  The other four men glued their eyes on their plates
and chewed steadily and with thoughtful precision, their ears moving and
wobbling, in time with their jaws, like the ears of so many animals.

Wolf Larsen had little to say at first, doing no more than reply when he
was addressed.  Not that he was abashed.  Far from it.  This woman was a
new type to him, a different breed from any he had ever known, and he was
curious.  He studied her, his eyes rarely leaving her face unless to
follow the movements of her hands or shoulders.  I studied her myself,
and though it was I who maintained the conversation, I know that I was a
bit shy, not quite self-possessed.  His was the perfect poise, the
supreme confidence in self, which nothing could shake; and he was no more
timid of a woman than he was of storm and battle.

“And when shall we arrive at Yokohama?” she asked, turning to him and
looking him squarely in the eyes.

There it was, the question flat.  The jaws stopped working, the ears
ceased wobbling, and though eyes remained glued on plates, each man
listened greedily for the answer.

“In four months, possibly three if the season closes early,” Wolf Larsen
said.

She caught her breath and stammered, “I—I thought—I was given to
understand that Yokohama was only a day’s sail away.  It—”  Here she
paused and looked about the table at the circle of unsympathetic faces
staring hard at the plates.  “It is not right,” she concluded.

“That is a question you must settle with Mr. Van Weyden there,” he
replied, nodding to me with a mischievous twinkle.  “Mr. Van Weyden is
what you may call an authority on such things as rights.  Now I, who am
only a sailor, would look upon the situation somewhat differently.  It
may possibly be your misfortune that you have to remain with us, but it
is certainly our good fortune.”

He regarded her smilingly.  Her eyes fell before his gaze, but she lifted
them again, and defiantly, to mine.  I read the unspoken question there:
was it right?  But I had decided that the part I was to play must be a
neutral one, so I did not answer.

“What do you think?” she demanded.

“That it is unfortunate, especially if you have any engagements falling
due in the course of the next several months.  But, since you say that
you were voyaging to Japan for your health, I can assure you that it will
improve no better anywhere than aboard the _Ghost_.”

I saw her eyes flash with indignation, and this time it was I who dropped
mine, while I felt my face flushing under her gaze.  It was cowardly, but
what else could I do?

“Mr. Van Weyden speaks with the voice of authority,” Wolf Larsen laughed.

I nodded my head, and she, having recovered herself, waited expectantly.

“Not that he is much to speak of now,” Wolf Larsen went on, “but he has
improved wonderfully.  You should have seen him when he came on board.  A
more scrawny, pitiful specimen of humanity one could hardly conceive.
Isn’t that so, Kerfoot?”

Kerfoot, thus directly addressed, was startled into dropping his knife on
the floor, though he managed to grunt affirmation.

“Developed himself by peeling potatoes and washing dishes.  Eh, Kerfoot?”

Again that worthy grunted.

“Look at him now.  True, he is not what you would term muscular, but
still he has muscles, which is more than he had when he came aboard.
Also, he has legs to stand on.  You would not think so to look at him,
but he was quite unable to stand alone at first.”

The hunters were snickering, but she looked at me with a sympathy in her
eyes which more than compensated for Wolf Larsen’s nastiness.  In truth,
it had been so long since I had received sympathy that I was softened,
and I became then, and gladly, her willing slave.  But I was angry with
Wolf Larsen.  He was challenging my manhood with his slurs, challenging
the very legs he claimed to be instrumental in getting for me.

“I may have learned to stand on my own legs,” I retorted.  “But I have
yet to stamp upon others with them.”

He looked at me insolently.  “Your education is only half completed,
then,” he said dryly, and turned to her.

“We are very hospitable upon the _Ghost_.  Mr. Van Weyden has discovered
that.  We do everything to make our guests feel at home, eh, Mr. Van
Weyden?”

“Even to the peeling of potatoes and the washing of dishes,” I answered,
“to say nothing to wringing their necks out of very fellowship.”

“I beg of you not to receive false impressions of us from Mr. Van
Weyden,” he interposed with mock anxiety.  “You will observe, Miss
Brewster, that he carries a dirk in his belt, a—ahem—a most unusual thing
for a ship’s officer to do.  While really very estimable, Mr. Van Weyden
is sometimes—how shall I say?—er—quarrelsome, and harsh measures are
necessary.  He is quite reasonable and fair in his calm moments, and as
he is calm now he will not deny that only yesterday he threatened my
life.”

I was well-nigh choking, and my eyes were certainly fiery.  He drew
attention to me.

“Look at him now.  He can scarcely control himself in your presence.  He
is not accustomed to the presence of ladies anyway.  I shall have to arm
myself before I dare go on deck with him.”

He shook his head sadly, murmuring, “Too bad, too bad,” while the hunters
burst into guffaws of laughter.

The deep-sea voices of these men, rumbling and bellowing in the confined
space, produced a wild effect.  The whole setting was wild, and for the
first time, regarding this strange woman and realizing how incongruous
she was in it, I was aware of how much a part of it I was myself.  I knew
these men and their mental processes, was one of them myself, living the
seal-hunting life, eating the seal-hunting fare, thinking, largely, the
seal-hunting thoughts.  There was for me no strangeness to it, to the
rough clothes, the coarse faces, the wild laughter, and the lurching
cabin walls and swaying sea-lamps.

As I buttered a piece of bread my eyes chanced to rest upon my hand.  The
knuckles were skinned and inflamed clear across, the fingers swollen, the
nails rimmed with black.  I felt the mattress-like growth of beard on my
neck, knew that the sleeve of my coat was ripped, that a button was
missing from the throat of the blue shirt I wore.  The dirk mentioned by
Wolf Larsen rested in its sheath on my hip.  It was very natural that it
should be there,—how natural I had not imagined until now, when I looked
upon it with her eyes and knew how strange it and all that went with it
must appear to her.

But she divined the mockery in Wolf Larsen’s words, and again favoured me
with a sympathetic glance.  But there was a look of bewilderment also in
her eyes.  That it was mockery made the situation more puzzling to her.

“I may be taken off by some passing vessel, perhaps,” she suggested.

“There will be no passing vessels, except other sealing-schooners,” Wolf
Larsen made answer.

“I have no clothes, nothing,” she objected.  “You hardly realize, sir,
that I am not a man, or that I am unaccustomed to the vagrant, careless
life which you and your men seem to lead.”

“The sooner you get accustomed to it, the better,” he said.

“I’ll furnish you with cloth, needles, and thread,” he added.  “I hope it
will not be too dreadful a hardship for you to make yourself a dress or
two.”

She made a wry pucker with her mouth, as though to advertise her
ignorance of dressmaking.  That she was frightened and bewildered, and
that she was bravely striving to hide it, was quite plain to me.

“I suppose you’re like Mr. Van Weyden there, accustomed to having things
done for you.  Well, I think doing a few things for yourself will hardly
dislocate any joints.  By the way, what do you do for a living?”

She regarded him with amazement unconcealed.

“I mean no offence, believe me.  People eat, therefore they must procure
the wherewithal.  These men here shoot seals in order to live; for the
same reason I sail this schooner; and Mr. Van Weyden, for the present at
any rate, earns his salty grub by assisting me.  Now what do you do?”

She shrugged her shoulders.

“Do you feed yourself?  Or does some one else feed you?”

“I’m afraid some one else has fed me most of my life,” she laughed,
trying bravely to enter into the spirit of his quizzing, though I could
see a terror dawning and growing in her eyes as she watched Wolf Larsen.

“And I suppose some one else makes your bed for you?”

“I _have_ made beds,” she replied.

“Very often?”

She shook her head with mock ruefulness.

“Do you know what they do to poor men in the States, who, like you, do
not work for their living?”

“I am very ignorant,” she pleaded.  “What do they do to the poor men who
are like me?”

“They send them to jail.  The crime of not earning a living, in their
case, is called vagrancy.  If I were Mr. Van Weyden, who harps eternally
on questions of right and wrong, I’d ask, by what right do you live when
you do nothing to deserve living?”

“But as you are not Mr. Van Weyden, I don’t have to answer, do I?”

She beamed upon him through her terror-filled eyes, and the pathos of it
cut me to the heart.  I must in some way break in and lead the
conversation into other channels.

“Have you ever earned a dollar by your own labour?” he demanded, certain
of her answer, a triumphant vindictiveness in his voice.

“Yes, I have,” she answered slowly, and I could have laughed aloud at his
crestfallen visage.  “I remember my father giving me a dollar once, when
I was a little girl, for remaining absolutely quiet for five minutes.”

He smiled indulgently.

“But that was long ago,” she continued.  “And you would scarcely demand a
little girl of nine to earn her own living.”

“At present, however,” she said, after another slight pause, “I earn
about eighteen hundred dollars a year.”

With one accord, all eyes left the plates and settled on her.  A woman
who earned eighteen hundred dollars a year was worth looking at.  Wolf
Larsen was undisguised in his admiration.

“Salary, or piece-work?” he asked.

“Piece-work,” she answered promptly.

“Eighteen hundred,” he calculated.  “That’s a hundred and fifty dollars a
month.  Well, Miss Brewster, there is nothing small about the _Ghost_.
Consider yourself on salary during the time you remain with us.”

She made no acknowledgment.  She was too unused as yet to the whims of
the man to accept them with equanimity.

“I forgot to inquire,” he went on suavely, “as to the nature of your
occupation.  What commodities do you turn out?  What tools and materials
do you require?”

“Paper and ink,” she laughed.  “And, oh! also a typewriter.”

“You are Maud Brewster,” I said slowly and with certainty, almost as
though I were charging her with a crime.

Her eyes lifted curiously to mine.  “How do you know?”

“Aren’t you?” I demanded.

She acknowledged her identity with a nod.  It was Wolf Larsen’s turn to
be puzzled.  The name and its magic signified nothing to him.  I was
proud that it did mean something to me, and for the first time in a weary
while I was convincingly conscious of a superiority over him.

“I remember writing a review of a thin little volume—” I had begun
carelessly, when she interrupted me.

“You!” she cried.  “You are—”

She was now staring at me in wide-eyed wonder.

I nodded my identity, in turn.

“Humphrey Van Weyden,” she concluded; then added with a sigh of relief,
and unaware that she had glanced that relief at Wolf Larsen, “I am so
glad.”

“I remember the review,” she went on hastily, becoming aware of the
awkwardness of her remark; “that too, too flattering review.”

“Not at all,” I denied valiantly.  “You impeach my sober judgment and
make my canons of little worth.  Besides, all my brother critics were
with me.  Didn’t Lang include your ‘Kiss Endured’ among the four supreme
sonnets by women in the English language?”

“But you called me the American Mrs. Meynell!”

“Was it not true?” I demanded.

“No, not that,” she answered.  “I was hurt.”

“We can measure the unknown only by the known,” I replied, in my finest
academic manner.  “As a critic I was compelled to place you.  You have
now become a yardstick yourself.  Seven of your thin little volumes are
on my shelves; and there are two thicker volumes, the essays, which, you
will pardon my saying, and I know not which is flattered more, fully
equal your verse.  The time is not far distant when some unknown will
arise in England and the critics will name her the English Maud
Brewster.”

“You are very kind, I am sure,” she murmured; and the very
conventionality of her tones and words, with the host of associations it
aroused of the old life on the other side of the world, gave me a quick
thrill—rich with remembrance but stinging sharp with home-sickness.

“And you are Maud Brewster,” I said solemnly, gazing across at her.

“And you are Humphrey Van Weyden,” she said, gazing back at me with equal
solemnity and awe.  “How unusual!  I don’t understand.  We surely are not
to expect some wildly romantic sea-story from your sober pen.”

“No, I am not gathering material, I assure you,” was my answer.  “I have
neither aptitude nor inclination for fiction.”

“Tell me, why have you always buried yourself in California?” she next
asked.  “It has not been kind of you.  We of the East have seen to very
little of you—too little, indeed, of the Dean of American Letters, the
Second.”

I bowed to, and disclaimed, the compliment.  “I nearly met you, once, in
Philadelphia, some Browning affair or other—you were to lecture, you
know.  My train was four hours late.”

And then we quite forgot where we were, leaving Wolf Larsen stranded and
silent in the midst of our flood of gossip.  The hunters left the table
and went on deck, and still we talked.  Wolf Larsen alone remained.
Suddenly I became aware of him, leaning back from the table and listening
curiously to our alien speech of a world he did not know.

I broke short off in the middle of a sentence.  The present, with all its
perils and anxieties, rushed upon me with stunning force.  It smote Miss
Brewster likewise, a vague and nameless terror rushing into her eyes as
she regarded Wolf Larsen.

He rose to his feet and laughed awkwardly.  The sound of it was metallic.

“Oh, don’t mind me,” he said, with a self-depreciatory wave of his hand.
“I don’t count.  Go on, go on, I pray you.”

But the gates of speech were closed, and we, too, rose from the table and
laughed awkwardly.




CHAPTER XXI


The chagrin Wolf Larsen felt from being ignored by Maud Brewster and me
in the conversation at table had to express itself in some fashion, and
it fell to Thomas Mugridge to be the victim.  He had not mended his ways
nor his shirt, though the latter he contended he had changed.  The
garment itself did not bear out the assertion, nor did the accumulations
of grease on stove and pot and pan attest a general cleanliness.

“I’ve given you warning, Cooky,” Wolf Larsen said, “and now you’ve got to
take your medicine.”

Mugridge’s face turned white under its sooty veneer, and when Wolf Larsen
called for a rope and a couple of men, the miserable Cockney fled wildly
out of the galley and dodged and ducked about the deck with the grinning
crew in pursuit.  Few things could have been more to their liking than to
give him a tow over the side, for to the forecastle he had sent messes
and concoctions of the vilest order.  Conditions favoured the
undertaking.  The _Ghost_ was slipping through the water at no more than
three miles an hour, and the sea was fairly calm.  But Mugridge had
little stomach for a dip in it.  Possibly he had seen men towed before.
Besides, the water was frightfully cold, and his was anything but a
rugged constitution.

As usual, the watches below and the hunters turned out for what promised
sport.  Mugridge seemed to be in rabid fear of the water, and he
exhibited a nimbleness and speed we did not dream he possessed.  Cornered
in the right-angle of the poop and galley, he sprang like a cat to the
top of the cabin and ran aft.  But his pursuers forestalling him, he
doubled back across the cabin, passed over the galley, and gained the
deck by means of the steerage-scuttle.  Straight forward he raced, the
boat-puller Harrison at his heels and gaining on him.  But Mugridge,
leaping suddenly, caught the jib-boom-lift.  It happened in an instant.
Holding his weight by his arms, and in mid-air doubling his body at the
hips, he let fly with both feet.  The oncoming Harrison caught the kick
squarely in the pit of the stomach, groaned involuntarily, and doubled up
and sank backward to the deck.

Hand-clapping and roars of laughter from the hunters greeted the exploit,
while Mugridge, eluding half of his pursuers at the foremast, ran aft and
through the remainder like a runner on the football field.  Straight aft
he held, to the poop and along the poop to the stern.  So great was his
speed that as he curved past the corner of the cabin he slipped and fell.
Nilson was standing at the wheel, and the Cockney’s hurtling body struck
his legs.  Both went down together, but Mugridge alone arose.  By some
freak of pressures, his frail body had snapped the strong man’s leg like
a pipe-stem.

Parsons took the wheel, and the pursuit continued.  Round and round the
decks they went, Mugridge sick with fear, the sailors hallooing and
shouting directions to one another, and the hunters bellowing
encouragement and laughter.  Mugridge went down on the fore-hatch under
three men; but he emerged from the mass like an eel, bleeding at the
mouth, the offending shirt ripped into tatters, and sprang for the
main-rigging.  Up he went, clear up, beyond the ratlines, to the very
masthead.

Half-a-dozen sailors swarmed to the crosstrees after him, where they
clustered and waited while two of their number, Oofty-Oofty and Black
(who was Latimer’s boat-steerer), continued up the thin steel stays,
lifting their bodies higher and higher by means of their arms.

It was a perilous undertaking, for, at a height of over a hundred feet
from the deck, holding on by their hands, they were not in the best of
positions to protect themselves from Mugridge’s feet.  And Mugridge
kicked savagely, till the Kanaka, hanging on with one hand, seized the
Cockney’s foot with the other.  Black duplicated the performance a moment
later with the other foot.  Then the three writhed together in a swaying
tangle, struggling, sliding, and falling into the arms of their mates on
the crosstrees.

The aërial battle was over, and Thomas Mugridge, whining and gibbering,
his mouth flecked with bloody foam, was brought down to deck.  Wolf
Larsen rove a bowline in a piece of rope and slipped it under his
shoulders.  Then he was carried aft and flung into the sea.
Forty,—fifty,—sixty feet of line ran out, when Wolf Larsen cried “Belay!”
Oofty-Oofty took a turn on a bitt, the rope tautened, and the _Ghost_,
lunging onward, jerked the cook to the surface.

It was a pitiful spectacle.  Though he could not drown, and was
nine-lived in addition, he was suffering all the agonies of
half-drowning.  The _Ghost_ was going very slowly, and when her stern
lifted on a wave and she slipped forward she pulled the wretch to the
surface and gave him a moment in which to breathe; but between each lift
the stern fell, and while the bow lazily climbed the next wave the line
slacked and he sank beneath.

I had forgotten the existence of Maud Brewster, and I remembered her with
a start as she stepped lightly beside me.  It was her first time on deck
since she had come aboard.  A dead silence greeted her appearance.

“What is the cause of the merriment?” she asked.

“Ask Captain Larsen,” I answered composedly and coldly, though inwardly
my blood was boiling at the thought that she should be witness to such
brutality.

She took my advice and was turning to put it into execution, when her
eyes lighted on Oofty-Oofty, immediately before her, his body instinct
with alertness and grace as he held the turn of the rope.

“Are you fishing?” she asked him.

He made no reply.  His eyes, fixed intently on the sea astern, suddenly
flashed.

“Shark ho, sir!” he cried.

“Heave in!  Lively!  All hands tail on!” Wolf Larsen shouted, springing
himself to the rope in advance of the quickest.

Mugridge had heard the Kanaka’s warning cry and was screaming madly.  I
could see a black fin cutting the water and making for him with greater
swiftness than he was being pulled aboard.  It was an even toss whether
the shark or we would get him, and it was a matter of moments.  When
Mugridge was directly beneath us, the stern descended the slope of a
passing wave, thus giving the advantage to the shark.  The fin
disappeared.  The belly flashed white in swift upward rush.  Almost
equally swift, but not quite, was Wolf Larsen.  He threw his strength
into one tremendous jerk.  The Cockney’s body left the water; so did part
of the shark’s.  He drew up his legs, and the man-eater seemed no more
than barely to touch one foot, sinking back into the water with a splash.
But at the moment of contact Thomas Mugridge cried out.  Then he came in
like a fresh-caught fish on a line, clearing the rail generously and
striking the deck in a heap, on hands and knees, and rolling over.

But a fountain of blood was gushing forth.  The right foot was missing,
amputated neatly at the ankle.  I looked instantly to Maud Brewster.  Her
face was white, her eyes dilated with horror.  She was gazing, not at
Thomas Mugridge, but at Wolf Larsen.  And he was aware of it, for he
said, with one of his short laughs:

“Man-play, Miss Brewster.  Somewhat rougher, I warrant, than what you
have been used to, but still-man-play.  The shark was not in the
reckoning.  It—”

But at this juncture, Mugridge, who had lifted his head and ascertained
the extent of his loss, floundered over on the deck and buried his teeth
in Wolf Larsen’s leg.  Wolf Larsen stooped, coolly, to the Cockney, and
pressed with thumb and finger at the rear of the jaws and below the ears.
The jaws opened with reluctance, and Wolf Larsen stepped free.

“As I was saying,” he went on, as though nothing unwonted had happened,
“the shark was not in the reckoning.  It was—ahem—shall we say
Providence?”

She gave no sign that she had heard, though the expression of her eyes
changed to one of inexpressible loathing as she started to turn away.
She no more than started, for she swayed and tottered, and reached her
hand weakly out to mine.  I caught her in time to save her from falling,
and helped her to a seat on the cabin.  I thought she might faint
outright, but she controlled herself.

“Will you get a tourniquet, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen called to me.

I hesitated.  Her lips moved, and though they formed no words, she
commanded me with her eyes, plainly as speech, to go to the help of the
unfortunate man.  “Please,” she managed to whisper, and I could but obey.

By now I had developed such skill at surgery that Wolf Larsen, with a few
words of advice, left me to my task with a couple of sailors for
assistants.  For his task he elected a vengeance on the shark.  A heavy
swivel-hook, baited with fat salt-pork, was dropped overside; and by the
time I had compressed the severed veins and arteries, the sailors were
singing and heaving in the offending monster.  I did not see it myself,
but my assistants, first one and then the other, deserted me for a few
moments to run amidships and look at what was going on.  The shark, a
sixteen-footer, was hoisted up against the main-rigging.  Its jaws were
pried apart to their greatest extension, and a stout stake, sharpened at
both ends, was so inserted that when the pries were removed the spread
jaws were fixed upon it.  This accomplished, the hook was cut out.  The
shark dropped back into the sea, helpless, yet with its full strength,
doomed—to lingering starvation—a living death less meet for it than for
the man who devised the punishment.




CHAPTER XXII


I knew what it was as she came toward me.  For ten minutes I had watched
her talking earnestly with the engineer, and now, with a sign for
silence, I drew her out of earshot of the helmsman.  Her face was white
and set; her large eyes, larger than usual what of the purpose in them,
looked penetratingly into mine.  I felt rather timid and apprehensive,
for she had come to search Humphrey Van Weyden’s soul, and Humphrey Van
Weyden had nothing of which to be particularly proud since his advent on
the _Ghost_.

We walked to the break of the poop, where she turned and faced me.  I
glanced around to see that no one was within hearing distance.

“What is it?” I asked gently; but the expression of determination on her
face did not relax.

“I can readily understand,” she began, “that this morning’s affair was
largely an accident; but I have been talking with Mr. Haskins.  He tells
me that the day we were rescued, even while I was in the cabin, two men
were drowned, deliberately drowned—murdered.”

There was a query in her voice, and she faced me accusingly, as though I
were guilty of the deed, or at least a party to it.

“The information is quite correct,” I answered.  “The two men were
murdered.”

“And you permitted it!” she cried.

“I was unable to prevent it, is a better way of phrasing it,” I replied,
still gently.

“But you tried to prevent it?”  There was an emphasis on the “tried,” and
a pleading little note in her voice.

“Oh, but you didn’t,” she hurried on, divining my answer.  “But why
didn’t you?”

I shrugged my shoulders.  “You must remember, Miss Brewster, that you are
a new inhabitant of this little world, and that you do not yet understand
the laws which operate within it.  You bring with you certain fine
conceptions of humanity, manhood, conduct, and such things; but here you
will find them misconceptions.  I have found it so,” I added, with an
involuntary sigh.

She shook her head incredulously.

“What would you advise, then?” I asked.  “That I should take a knife, or
a gun, or an axe, and kill this man?”

She half started back.

“No, not that!”

“Then what should I do?  Kill myself?”

“You speak in purely materialistic terms,” she objected.  “There is such
a thing as moral courage, and moral courage is never without effect.”

“Ah,” I smiled, “you advise me to kill neither him nor myself, but to let
him kill me.”  I held up my hand as she was about to speak.  “For moral
courage is a worthless asset on this little floating world.  Leach, one
of the men who were murdered, had moral courage to an unusual degree.  So
had the other man, Johnson.  Not only did it not stand them in good
stead, but it destroyed them.  And so with me if I should exercise what
little moral courage I may possess.

“You must understand, Miss Brewster, and understand clearly, that this
man is a monster.  He is without conscience.  Nothing is sacred to him,
nothing is too terrible for him to do.  It was due to his whim that I was
detained aboard in the first place.  It is due to his whim that I am
still alive.  I do nothing, can do nothing, because I am a slave to this
monster, as you are now a slave to him; because I desire to live, as you
will desire to live; because I cannot fight and overcome him, just as you
will not be able to fight and overcome him.”

She waited for me to go on.

“What remains?  Mine is the role of the weak.  I remain silent and suffer
ignominy, as you will remain silent and suffer ignominy.  And it is well.
It is the best we can do if we wish to live.  The battle is not always to
the strong.  We have not the strength with which to fight this man; we
must dissimulate, and win, if win we can, by craft.  If you will be
advised by me, this is what you will do.  I know my position is perilous,
and I may say frankly that yours is even more perilous.  We must stand
together, without appearing to do so, in secret alliance.  I shall not be
able to side with you openly, and, no matter what indignities may be put
upon me, you are to remain likewise silent.  We must provoke no scenes
with this man, nor cross his will.  And we must keep smiling faces and be
friendly with him no matter how repulsive it may be.”

She brushed her hand across her forehead in a puzzled way, saying, “Still
I do not understand.”

“You must do as I say,” I interrupted authoritatively, for I saw Wolf
Larsen’s gaze wandering toward us from where he paced up and down with
Latimer amidships.  “Do as I say, and ere long you will find I am right.”

“What shall I do, then?” she asked, detecting the anxious glance I had
shot at the object of our conversation, and impressed, I flatter myself,
with the earnestness of my manner.

“Dispense with all the moral courage you can,” I said briskly.  “Don’t
arouse this man’s animosity.  Be quite friendly with him, talk with him,
discuss literature and art with him—he is fond of such things.  You will
find him an interested listener and no fool.  And for your own sake try
to avoid witnessing, as much as you can, the brutalities of the ship.  It
will make it easier for you to act your part.”

“I am to lie,” she said in steady, rebellious tones, “by speech and
action to lie.”

Wolf Larsen had separated from Latimer and was coming toward us.  I was
desperate.

“Please, please understand me,” I said hurriedly, lowering my voice.
“All your experience of men and things is worthless here.  You must begin
over again.  I know,—I can see it—you have, among other ways, been used
to managing people with your eyes, letting your moral courage speak out
through them, as it were.  You have already managed me with your eyes,
commanded me with them.  But don’t try it on Wolf Larsen.  You could as
easily control a lion, while he would make a mock of you.  He would—I
have always been proud of the fact that I discovered him,” I said,
turning the conversation as Wolf Larsen stepped on the poop and joined
us.  “The editors were afraid of him and the publishers would have none
of him.  But I knew, and his genius and my judgment were vindicated when
he made that magnificent hit with his ‘Forge.’”

“And it was a newspaper poem,” she said glibly.

“It did happen to see the light in a newspaper,” I replied, “but not
because the magazine editors had been denied a glimpse at it.”

“We were talking of Harris,” I said to Wolf Larsen.

“Oh, yes,” he acknowledged.  “I remember the ‘Forge.’  Filled with pretty
sentiments and an almighty faith in human illusions.  By the way, Mr. Van
Weyden, you’d better look in on Cooky.  He’s complaining and restless.”

Thus was I bluntly dismissed from the poop, only to find Mugridge
sleeping soundly from the morphine I had given him.  I made no haste to
return on deck, and when I did I was gratified to see Miss Brewster in
animated conversation with Wolf Larsen.  As I say, the sight gratified
me.  She was following my advice.  And yet I was conscious of a slight
shock or hurt in that she was able to do the thing I had begged her to do
and which she had notably disliked.




CHAPTER XXIII


Brave winds, blowing fair, swiftly drove the _Ghost_ northward into the
seal herd.  We encountered it well up to the forty-fourth parallel, in a
raw and stormy sea across which the wind harried the fog-banks in eternal
flight.  For days at a time we could never see the sun nor take an
observation; then the wind would sweep the face of the ocean clean, the
waves would ripple and flash, and we would learn where we were.  A day of
clear weather might follow, or three days or four, and then the fog would
settle down upon us, seemingly thicker than ever.

The hunting was perilous; yet the boats, lowered day after day, were
swallowed up in the grey obscurity, and were seen no more till nightfall,
and often not till long after, when they would creep in like sea-wraiths,
one by one, out of the grey.  Wainwright—the hunter whom Wolf Larsen had
stolen with boat and men—took advantage of the veiled sea and escaped.
He disappeared one morning in the encircling fog with his two men, and we
never saw them again, though it was not many days when we learned that
they had passed from schooner to schooner until they finally regained
their own.

This was the thing I had set my mind upon doing, but the opportunity
never offered.  It was not in the mate’s province to go out in the boats,
and though I manœuvred cunningly for it, Wolf Larsen never granted me the
privilege.  Had he done so, I should have managed somehow to carry Miss
Brewster away with me.  As it was, the situation was approaching a stage
which I was afraid to consider.  I involuntarily shunned the thought of
it, and yet the thought continually arose in my mind like a haunting
spectre.

I had read sea-romances in my time, wherein figured, as a matter of
course, the lone woman in the midst of a shipload of men; but I learned,
now, that I had never comprehended the deeper significance of such a
situation—the thing the writers harped upon and exploited so thoroughly.
And here it was, now, and I was face to face with it.  That it should be
as vital as possible, it required no more than that the woman should be
Maud Brewster, who now charmed me in person as she had long charmed me
through her work.

No one more out of environment could be imagined.  She was a delicate,
ethereal creature, swaying and willowy, light and graceful of movement.
It never seemed to me that she walked, or, at least, walked after the
ordinary manner of mortals.  Hers was an extreme lithesomeness, and she
moved with a certain indefinable airiness, approaching one as down might
float or as a bird on noiseless wings.

She was like a bit of Dresden china, and I was continually impressed with
what I may call her fragility.  As at the time I caught her arm when
helping her below, so at any time I was quite prepared, should stress or
rough handling befall her, to see her crumble away.  I have never seen
body and spirit in such perfect accord.  Describe her verse, as the
critics have described it, as sublimated and spiritual, and you have
described her body.  It seemed to partake of her soul, to have analogous
attributes, and to link it to life with the slenderest of chains.
Indeed, she trod the earth lightly, and in her constitution there was
little of the robust clay.

She was in striking contrast to Wolf Larsen.  Each was nothing that the
other was, everything that the other was not.  I noted them walking the
deck together one morning, and I likened them to the extreme ends of the
human ladder of evolution—the one the culmination of all savagery, the
other the finished product of the finest civilization.  True, Wolf Larsen
possessed intellect to an unusual degree, but it was directed solely to
the exercise of his savage instincts and made him but the more formidable
a savage.  He was splendidly muscled, a heavy man, and though he strode
with the certitude and directness of the physical man, there was nothing
heavy about his stride.  The jungle and the wilderness lurked in the
uplift and downput of his feet.  He was cat-footed, and lithe, and
strong, always strong.  I likened him to some great tiger, a beast of
prowess and prey.  He looked it, and the piercing glitter that arose at
times in his eyes was the same piercing glitter I had observed in the
eyes of caged leopards and other preying creatures of the wild.

But this day, as I noted them pacing up and down, I saw that it was she
who terminated the walk.  They came up to where I was standing by the
entrance to the companion-way.  Though she betrayed it by no outward
sign, I felt, somehow, that she was greatly perturbed.  She made some
idle remark, looking at me, and laughed lightly enough; but I saw her
eyes return to his, involuntarily, as though fascinated; then they fell,
but not swiftly enough to veil the rush of terror that filled them.

It was in his eyes that I saw the cause of her perturbation.  Ordinarily
grey and cold and harsh, they were now warm and soft and golden, and all
a-dance with tiny lights that dimmed and faded, or welled up till the
full orbs were flooded with a glowing radiance.  Perhaps it was to this
that the golden colour was due; but golden his eyes were, enticing and
masterful, at the same time luring and compelling, and speaking a demand
and clamour of the blood which no woman, much less Maud Brewster, could
misunderstand.

Her own terror rushed upon me, and in that moment of fear—the most
terrible fear a man can experience—I knew that in inexpressible ways she
was dear to me.  The knowledge that I loved her rushed upon me with the
terror, and with both emotions gripping at my heart and causing my blood
at the same time to chill and to leap riotously, I felt myself drawn by a
power without me and beyond me, and found my eyes returning against my
will to gaze into the eyes of Wolf Larsen.  But he had recovered himself.
The golden colour and the dancing lights were gone.  Cold and grey and
glittering they were as he bowed brusquely and turned away.

“I am afraid,” she whispered, with a shiver.  “I am so afraid.”

I, too, was afraid, and what of my discovery of how much she meant to me
my mind was in a turmoil; but, I succeeded in answering quite calmly:

“All will come right, Miss Brewster.  Trust me, it will come right.”

She answered with a grateful little smile that sent my heart pounding,
and started to descend the companion-stairs.

For a long while I remained standing where she had left me.  There was
imperative need to adjust myself, to consider the significance of the
changed aspect of things.  It had come, at last, love had come, when I
least expected it and under the most forbidding conditions.  Of course,
my philosophy had always recognized the inevitableness of the love-call
sooner or later; but long years of bookish silence had made me
inattentive and unprepared.

And now it had come!  Maud Brewster!  My memory flashed back to that
first thin little volume on my desk, and I saw before me, as though in
the concrete, the row of thin little volumes on my library shelf.  How I
had welcomed each of them!  Each year one had come from the press, and to
me each was the advent of the year.  They had voiced a kindred intellect
and spirit, and as such I had received them into a camaraderie of the
mind; but now their place was in my heart.

My heart?  A revulsion of feeling came over me.  I seemed to stand
outside myself and to look at myself incredulously.  Maud Brewster!
Humphrey Van Weyden, “the cold-blooded fish,” the “emotionless monster,”
the “analytical demon,” of Charley Furuseth’s christening, in love!  And
then, without rhyme or reason, all sceptical, my mind flew back to a
small biographical note in the red-bound _Who’s Who_, and I said to
myself, “She was born in Cambridge, and she is twenty-seven years old.”
And then I said, “Twenty-seven years old and still free and fancy free?”
But how did I know she was fancy free?  And the pang of new-born jealousy
put all incredulity to flight.  There was no doubt about it.  I was
jealous; therefore I loved.  And the woman I loved was Maud Brewster.

I, Humphrey Van Weyden, was in love!  And again the doubt assailed me.
Not that I was afraid of it, however, or reluctant to meet it.  On the
contrary, idealist that I was to the most pronounced degree, my
philosophy had always recognized and guerdoned love as the greatest thing
in the world, the aim and the summit of being, the most exquisite pitch
of joy and happiness to which life could thrill, the thing of all things
to be hailed and welcomed and taken into the heart.  But now that it had
come I could not believe.  I could not be so fortunate.  It was too good,
too good to be true.  Symons’s lines came into my head:

   “I wandered all these years among
   A world of women, seeking you.”

And then I had ceased seeking.  It was not for me, this greatest thing in
the world, I had decided.  Furuseth was right; I was abnormal, an
“emotionless monster,” a strange bookish creature, capable of pleasuring
in sensations only of the mind.  And though I had been surrounded by
women all my days, my appreciation of them had been æsthetic and nothing
more.  I had actually, at times, considered myself outside the pale, a
monkish fellow denied the eternal or the passing passions I saw and
understood so well in others.  And now it had come!  Undreamed of and
unheralded, it had come.  In what could have been no less than an
ecstasy, I left my post at the head of the companion-way and started
along the deck, murmuring to myself those beautiful lines of Mrs.
Browning:

   “I lived with visions for my company
   Instead of men and women years ago,
   And found them gentle mates, nor thought to know
   A sweeter music than they played to me.”

But the sweeter music was playing in my ears, and I was blind and
oblivious to all about me.  The sharp voice of Wolf Larsen aroused me.

“What the hell are you up to?” he was demanding.

I had strayed forward where the sailors were painting, and I came to
myself to find my advancing foot on the verge of overturning a paint-pot.

“Sleep-walking, sunstroke,—what?” he barked.

“No; indigestion,” I retorted, and continued my walk as if nothing
untoward had occurred.




CHAPTER XXIV


Among the most vivid memories of my life are those of the events on the
_Ghost_ which occurred during the forty hours succeeding the discovery of
my love for Maud Brewster.  I, who had lived my life in quiet places,
only to enter at the age of thirty-five upon a course of the most
irrational adventure I could have imagined, never had more incident and
excitement crammed into any forty hours of my experience.  Nor can I
quite close my ears to a small voice of pride which tells me I did not do
so badly, all things considered.

To begin with, at the midday dinner, Wolf Larsen informed the hunters
that they were to eat thenceforth in the steerage.  It was an
unprecedented thing on sealing-schooners, where it is the custom for the
hunters to rank, unofficially as officers.  He gave no reason, but his
motive was obvious enough.  Horner and Smoke had been displaying a
gallantry toward Maud Brewster, ludicrous in itself and inoffensive to
her, but to him evidently distasteful.

The announcement was received with black silence, though the other four
hunters glanced significantly at the two who had been the cause of their
banishment.  Jock Horner, quiet as was his way, gave no sign; but the
blood surged darkly across Smoke’s forehead, and he half opened his mouth
to speak.  Wolf Larsen was watching him, waiting for him, the steely
glitter in his eyes; but Smoke closed his mouth again without having said
anything.

“Anything to say?” the other demanded aggressively.

It was a challenge, but Smoke refused to accept it.

“About what?” he asked, so innocently that Wolf Larsen was disconcerted,
while the others smiled.

“Oh, nothing,” Wolf Larsen said lamely.  “I just thought you might want
to register a kick.”

“About what?” asked the imperturbable Smoke.

Smoke’s mates were now smiling broadly.  His captain could have killed
him, and I doubt not that blood would have flowed had not Maud Brewster
been present.  For that matter, it was her presence which enabled Smoke
to act as he did.  He was too discreet and cautious a man to incur Wolf
Larsen’s anger at a time when that anger could be expressed in terms
stronger than words.  I was in fear that a struggle might take place, but
a cry from the helmsman made it easy for the situation to save itself.

“Smoke ho!” the cry came down the open companion-way.

“How’s it bear?” Wolf Larsen called up.

“Dead astern, sir.”

“Maybe it’s a Russian,” suggested Latimer.

His words brought anxiety into the faces of the other hunters.  A Russian
could mean but one thing—a cruiser.  The hunters, never more than roughly
aware of the position of the ship, nevertheless knew that we were close
to the boundaries of the forbidden sea, while Wolf Larsen’s record as a
poacher was notorious.  All eyes centred upon him.

“We’re dead safe,” he assured them with a laugh.  “No salt mines this
time, Smoke.  But I’ll tell you what—I’ll lay odds of five to one it’s
the _Macedonia_.”

No one accepted his offer, and he went on: “In which event, I’ll lay ten
to one there’s trouble breezing up.”

“No, thank you,” Latimer spoke up.  “I don’t object to losing my money,
but I like to get a run for it anyway.  There never was a time when there
wasn’t trouble when you and that brother of yours got together, and I’ll
lay twenty to one on that.”

A general smile followed, in which Wolf Larsen joined, and the dinner
went on smoothly, thanks to me, for he treated me abominably the rest of
the meal, sneering at me and patronizing me till I was all a-tremble with
suppressed rage.  Yet I knew I must control myself for Maud Brewster’s
sake, and I received my reward when her eyes caught mine for a fleeting
second, and they said, as distinctly as if she spoke, “Be brave, be
brave.”

We left the table to go on deck, for a steamer was a welcome break in the
monotony of the sea on which we floated, while the conviction that it was
Death Larsen and the _Macedonia_ added to the excitement.  The stiff
breeze and heavy sea which had sprung up the previous afternoon had been
moderating all morning, so that it was now possible to lower the boats
for an afternoon’s hunt.  The hunting promised to be profitable.  We had
sailed since daylight across a sea barren of seals, and were now running
into the herd.

The smoke was still miles astern, but overhauling us rapidly, when we
lowered our boats.  They spread out and struck a northerly course across
the ocean.  Now and again we saw a sail lower, heard the reports of the
shot-guns, and saw the sail go up again.  The seals were thick, the wind
was dying away; everything favoured a big catch.  As we ran off to get
our leeward position of the last lee boat, we found the ocean fairly
carpeted with sleeping seals.  They were all about us, thicker than I had
ever seen them before, in twos and threes and bunches, stretched full
length on the surface and sleeping for all the world like so many lazy
young dogs.

Under the approaching smoke the hull and upper-works of a steamer were
growing larger.  It was the _Macedonia_.  I read her name through the
glasses as she passed by scarcely a mile to starboard.  Wolf Larsen
looked savagely at the vessel, while Maud Brewster was curious.

“Where is the trouble you were so sure was breezing up, Captain Larsen?”
she asked gaily.

He glanced at her, a moment’s amusement softening his features.

“What did you expect?  That they’d come aboard and cut our throats?”

“Something like that,” she confessed.  “You understand, seal-hunters are
so new and strange to me that I am quite ready to expect anything.”

He nodded his head.  “Quite right, quite right.  Your error is that you
failed to expect the worst.”

“Why, what can be worse than cutting our throats?” she asked, with pretty
naïve surprise.

“Cutting our purses,” he answered.  “Man is so made these days that his
capacity for living is determined by the money he possesses.”

“’Who steals my purse steals trash,’” she quoted.

“Who steals my purse steals my right to live,” was the reply, “old saws
to the contrary.  For he steals my bread and meat and bed, and in so
doing imperils my life.  There are not enough soup-kitchens and
bread-lines to go around, you know, and when men have nothing in their
purses they usually die, and die miserably—unless they are able to fill
their purses pretty speedily.”

“But I fail to see that this steamer has any designs on your purse.”

“Wait and you will see,” he answered grimly.

We did not have long to wait.  Having passed several miles beyond our
line of boats, the _Macedonia_ proceeded to lower her own.  We knew she
carried fourteen boats to our five (we were one short through the
desertion of Wainwright), and she began dropping them far to leeward of
our last boat, continued dropping them athwart our course, and finished
dropping them far to windward of our first weather boat.  The hunting,
for us, was spoiled.  There were no seals behind us, and ahead of us the
line of fourteen boats, like a huge broom, swept the herd before it.

Our boats hunted across the two or three miles of water between them and
the point where the _Macedonia’s_ had been dropped, and then headed for
home.  The wind had fallen to a whisper, the ocean was growing calmer and
calmer, and this, coupled with the presence of the great herd, made a
perfect hunting day—one of the two or three days to be encountered in the
whole of a lucky season.  An angry lot of men, boat-pullers and steerers
as well as hunters, swarmed over our side.  Each man felt that he had
been robbed; and the boats were hoisted in amid curses, which, if curses
had power, would have settled Death Larsen for all eternity—“Dead and
damned for a dozen iv eternities,” commented Louis, his eyes twinkling up
at me as he rested from hauling taut the lashings of his boat.

“Listen to them, and find if it is hard to discover the most vital thing
in their souls,” said Wolf Larsen.  “Faith? and love? and high ideals?
The good? the beautiful? the true?”

“Their innate sense of right has been violated,” Maud Brewster said,
joining the conversation.

She was standing a dozen feet away, one hand resting on the main-shrouds
and her body swaying gently to the slight roll of the ship.  She had not
raised her voice, and yet I was struck by its clear and bell-like tone.
Ah, it was sweet in my ears!  I scarcely dared look at her just then, for
the fear of betraying myself.  A boy’s cap was perched on her head, and
her hair, light brown and arranged in a loose and fluffy order that
caught the sun, seemed an aureole about the delicate oval of her face.
She was positively bewitching, and, withal, sweetly spirituelle, if not
saintly.  All my old-time marvel at life returned to me at sight of this
splendid incarnation of it, and Wolf Larsen’s cold explanation of life
and its meaning was truly ridiculous and laughable.

“A sentimentalist,” he sneered, “like Mr. Van Weyden.  Those men are
cursing because their desires have been outraged.  That is all.  What
desires?  The desires for the good grub and soft beds ashore which a
handsome pay-day brings them—the women and the drink, the gorging and the
beastliness which so truly expresses them, the best that is in them,
their highest aspirations, their ideals, if you please.  The exhibition
they make of their feelings is not a touching sight, yet it shows how
deeply they have been touched, how deeply their purses have been touched,
for to lay hands on their purses is to lay hands on their souls.”

“’You hardly behave as if your purse had been touched,” she said,
smilingly.

“Then it so happens that I am behaving differently, for my purse and my
soul have both been touched.  At the current price of skins in the London
market, and based on a fair estimate of what the afternoon’s catch would
have been had not the _Macedonia_ hogged it, the _Ghost_ has lost about
fifteen hundred dollars’ worth of skins.”

“You speak so calmly—” she began.

“But I do not feel calm; I could kill the man who robbed me,” he
interrupted.  “Yes, yes, I know, and that man my brother—more sentiment!
Bah!”

His face underwent a sudden change.  His voice was less harsh and wholly
sincere as he said:

“You must be happy, you sentimentalists, really and truly happy at
dreaming and finding things good, and, because you find some of them
good, feeling good yourself.  Now, tell me, you two, do you find me
good?”

“You are good to look upon—in a way,” I qualified.

“There are in you all powers for good,” was Maud Brewster’s answer.

“There you are!” he cried at her, half angrily.  “Your words are empty to
me.  There is nothing clear and sharp and definite about the thought you
have expressed.  You cannot pick it up in your two hands and look at it.
In point of fact, it is not a thought.  It is a feeling, a sentiment, a
something based upon illusion and not a product of the intellect at all.”

As he went on his voice again grew soft, and a confiding note came into
it.  “Do you know, I sometimes catch myself wishing that I, too, were
blind to the facts of life and only knew its fancies and illusions.
They’re wrong, all wrong, of course, and contrary to reason; but in the
face of them my reason tells me, wrong and most wrong, that to dream and
live illusions gives greater delight.  And after all, delight is the wage
for living.  Without delight, living is a worthless act.  To labour at
living and be unpaid is worse than to be dead.  He who delights the most
lives the most, and your dreams and unrealities are less disturbing to
you and more gratifying than are my facts to me.”

He shook his head slowly, pondering.

“I often doubt, I often doubt, the worthwhileness of reason.  Dreams must
be more substantial and satisfying.  Emotional delight is more filling
and lasting than intellectual delight; and, besides, you pay for your
moments of intellectual delight by having the blues.  Emotional delight
is followed by no more than jaded senses which speedily recuperate.  I
envy you, I envy you.”

He stopped abruptly, and then on his lips formed one of his strange
quizzical smiles, as he added:

“It’s from my brain I envy you, take notice, and not from my heart.  My
reason dictates it.  The envy is an intellectual product.  I am like a
sober man looking upon drunken men, and, greatly weary, wishing he, too,
were drunk.”

“Or like a wise man looking upon fools and wishing he, too, were a fool,”
I laughed.

“Quite so,” he said.  “You are a blessed, bankrupt pair of fools.  You
have no facts in your pocketbook.”

“Yet we spend as freely as you,” was Maud Brewster’s contribution.

“More freely, because it costs you nothing.”

“And because we draw upon eternity,” she retorted.

“Whether you do or think you do, it’s the same thing.  You spend what you
haven’t got, and in return you get greater value from spending what you
haven’t got than I get from spending what I have got, and what I have
sweated to get.”

“Why don’t you change the basis of your coinage, then?” she queried
teasingly.

He looked at her quickly, half-hopefully, and then said, all regretfully:
“Too late.  I’d like to, perhaps, but I can’t.  My pocketbook is stuffed
with the old coinage, and it’s a stubborn thing.  I can never bring
myself to recognize anything else as valid.”

He ceased speaking, and his gaze wandered absently past her and became
lost in the placid sea.  The old primal melancholy was strong upon him.
He was quivering to it.  He had reasoned himself into a spell of the
blues, and within few hours one could look for the devil within him to be
up and stirring.  I remembered Charley Furuseth, and knew this man’s
sadness as the penalty which the materialist ever pays for his
materialism.




CHAPTER XXV


“You’ve been on deck, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen said, the following
morning at the breakfast-table, “How do things look?”

“Clear enough,” I answered, glancing at the sunshine which streamed down
the open companion-way.  “Fair westerly breeze, with a promise of
stiffening, if Louis predicts correctly.”

He nodded his head in a pleased way.  “Any signs of fog?”

“Thick banks in the north and north-west.”

He nodded his head again, evincing even greater satisfaction than before.

“What of the _Macedonia_?”

“Not sighted,” I answered.

I could have sworn his face fell at the intelligence, but why he should
be disappointed I could not conceive.

I was soon to learn.  “Smoke ho!” came the hail from on deck, and his
face brightened.

“Good!” he exclaimed, and left the table at once to go on deck and into
the steerage, where the hunters were taking the first breakfast of their
exile.

Maud Brewster and I scarcely touched the food before us, gazing, instead,
in silent anxiety at each other, and listening to Wolf Larsen’s voice,
which easily penetrated the cabin through the intervening bulkhead.  He
spoke at length, and his conclusion was greeted with a wild roar of
cheers.  The bulkhead was too thick for us to hear what he said; but
whatever it was it affected the hunters strongly, for the cheering was
followed by loud exclamations and shouts of joy.

From the sounds on deck I knew that the sailors had been routed out and
were preparing to lower the boats.  Maud Brewster accompanied me on deck,
but I left her at the break of the poop, where she might watch the scene
and not be in it.  The sailors must have learned whatever project was on
hand, and the vim and snap they put into their work attested their
enthusiasm.  The hunters came trooping on deck with shot-guns and
ammunition-boxes, and, most unusual, their rifles.  The latter were
rarely taken in the boats, for a seal shot at long range with a rifle
invariably sank before a boat could reach it.  But each hunter this day
had his rifle and a large supply of cartridges.  I noticed they grinned
with satisfaction whenever they looked at the _Macedonia’s_ smoke, which
was rising higher and higher as she approached from the west.

The five boats went over the side with a rush, spread out like the ribs
of a fan, and set a northerly course, as on the preceding afternoon, for
us to follow.  I watched for some time, curiously, but there seemed
nothing extraordinary about their behaviour.  They lowered sails, shot
seals, and hoisted sails again, and continued on their way as I had
always seen them do.  The _Macedonia_ repeated her performance of
yesterday, “hogging” the sea by dropping her line of boats in advance of
ours and across our course.  Fourteen boats require a considerable spread
of ocean for comfortable hunting, and when she had completely lapped our
line she continued steaming into the north-east, dropping more boats as
she went.

“What’s up?” I asked Wolf Larsen, unable longer to keep my curiosity in
check.

“Never mind what’s up,” he answered gruffly.  “You won’t be a thousand
years in finding out, and in the meantime just pray for plenty of wind.”

“Oh, well, I don’t mind telling you,” he said the next moment.  “I’m
going to give that brother of mine a taste of his own medicine.  In
short, I’m going to play the hog myself, and not for one day, but for the
rest of the season,—if we’re in luck.”

“And if we’re not?” I queried.

“Not to be considered,” he laughed.  “We simply must be in luck, or it’s
all up with us.”

He had the wheel at the time, and I went forward to my hospital in the
forecastle, where lay the two crippled men, Nilson and Thomas Mugridge.
Nilson was as cheerful as could be expected, for his broken leg was
knitting nicely; but the Cockney was desperately melancholy, and I was
aware of a great sympathy for the unfortunate creature.  And the marvel
of it was that still he lived and clung to life.  The brutal years had
reduced his meagre body to splintered wreckage, and yet the spark of life
within burned brightly as ever.

“With an artificial foot—and they make excellent ones—you will be
stumping ships’ galleys to the end of time,” I assured him jovially.

But his answer was serious, nay, solemn.  “I don’t know about wot you
s’y, Mr. Van W’yden, but I do know I’ll never rest ’appy till I see that
’ell-’ound bloody well dead.  ’E cawn’t live as long as me.  ’E’s got no
right to live, an’ as the Good Word puts it, ‘’E shall shorely die,’ an’
I s’y, ‘Amen, an’ damn soon at that.’”

When I returned on deck I found Wolf Larsen steering mainly with one
hand, while with the other hand he held the marine glasses and studied
the situation of the boats, paying particular attention to the position
of the _Macedonia_.  The only change noticeable in our boats was that
they had hauled close on the wind and were heading several points west of
north.  Still, I could not see the expediency of the manœuvre, for the
free sea was still intercepted by the _Macedonia’s_ five weather boats,
which, in turn, had hauled close on the wind.  Thus they slowly diverged
toward the west, drawing farther away from the remainder of the boats in
their line.  Our boats were rowing as well as sailing.  Even the hunters
were pulling, and with three pairs of oars in the water they rapidly
overhauled what I may appropriately term the enemy.

The smoke of the _Macedonia_ had dwindled to a dim blot on the
north-eastern horizon.  Of the steamer herself nothing was to be seen.
We had been loafing along, till now, our sails shaking half the time and
spilling the wind; and twice, for short periods, we had been hove to.
But there was no more loafing.  Sheets were trimmed, and Wolf Larsen
proceeded to put the _Ghost_ through her paces.  We ran past our line of
boats and bore down upon the first weather boat of the other line.

“Down that flying jib, Mr. Van Weyden,” Wolf Larsen commanded.  “And
stand by to back over the jibs.”

I ran forward and had the downhaul of the flying jib all in and fast as
we slipped by the boat a hundred feet to leeward.  The three men in it
gazed at us suspiciously.  They had been hogging the sea, and they knew
Wolf Larsen, by reputation at any rate.  I noted that the hunter, a huge
Scandinavian sitting in the bow, held his rifle, ready to hand, across
his knees.  It should have been in its proper place in the rack.  When
they came opposite our stern, Wolf Larsen greeted them with a wave of the
hand, and cried:

“Come on board and have a ’gam’!”

“To gam,” among the sealing-schooners, is a substitute for the verbs “to
visit,” “to gossip.”  It expresses the garrulity of the sea, and is a
pleasant break in the monotony of the life.

The _Ghost_ swung around into the wind, and I finished my work forward in
time to run aft and lend a hand with the mainsheet.

“You will please stay on deck, Miss Brewster,” Wolf Larsen said, as he
started forward to meet his guest.  “And you too, Mr. Van Weyden.”

The boat had lowered its sail and run alongside.  The hunter, golden
bearded like a sea-king, came over the rail and dropped on deck.  But his
hugeness could not quite overcome his apprehensiveness.  Doubt and
distrust showed strongly in his face.  It was a transparent face, for all
of its hairy shield, and advertised instant relief when he glanced from
Wolf Larsen to me, noted that there was only the pair of us, and then
glanced over his own two men who had joined him.  Surely he had little
reason to be afraid.  He towered like a Goliath above Wolf Larsen.  He
must have measured six feet eight or nine inches in stature, and I
subsequently learned his weight—240 pounds.  And there was no fat about
him.  It was all bone and muscle.

A return of apprehension was apparent when, at the top of the
companion-way, Wolf Larsen invited him below.  But he reassured himself
with a glance down at his host—a big man himself but dwarfed by the
propinquity of the giant.  So all hesitancy vanished, and the pair
descended into the cabin.  In the meantime, his two men, as was the wont
of visiting sailors, had gone forward into the forecastle to do some
visiting themselves.

Suddenly, from the cabin came a great, choking bellow, followed by all
the sounds of a furious struggle.  It was the leopard and the lion, and
the lion made all the noise.  Wolf Larsen was the leopard.

“You see the sacredness of our hospitality,” I said bitterly to Maud
Brewster.

She nodded her head that she heard, and I noted in her face the signs of
the same sickness at sight or sound of violent struggle from which I had
suffered so severely during my first weeks on the _Ghost_.

“Wouldn’t it be better if you went forward, say by the steerage
companion-way, until it is over?” I suggested.

She shook her head and gazed at me pitifully.  She was not frightened,
but appalled, rather, at the human animality of it.

“You will understand,” I took advantage of the opportunity to say,
“whatever part I take in what is going on and what is to come, that I am
compelled to take it—if you and I are ever to get out of this scrape with
our lives.”

“It is not nice—for me,” I added.

“I understand,” she said, in a weak, far-away voice, and her eyes showed
me that she did understand.

The sounds from below soon died away.  Then Wolf Larsen came alone on
deck.  There was a slight flush under his bronze, but otherwise he bore
no signs of the battle.

“Send those two men aft, Mr. Van Weyden,” he said.

I obeyed, and a minute or two later they stood before him.  “Hoist in
your boat,” he said to them.  “Your hunter’s decided to stay aboard
awhile and doesn’t want it pounding alongside.”

“Hoist in your boat, I said,” he repeated, this time in sharper tones as
they hesitated to do his bidding.

“Who knows? you may have to sail with me for a time,” he said, quite
softly, with a silken threat that belied the softness, as they moved
slowly to comply, “and we might as well start with a friendly
understanding.  Lively now!  Death Larsen makes you jump better than
that, and you know it!”

Their movements perceptibly quickened under his coaching, and as the boat
swung inboard I was sent forward to let go the jibs.  Wolf Larsen, at the
wheel, directed the _Ghost_ after the _Macedonia’s_ second weather boat.

Under way, and with nothing for the time being to do, I turned my
attention to the situation of the boats.  The _Macedonia’s_ third weather
boat was being attacked by two of ours, the fourth by our remaining
three; and the fifth, turn about, was taking a hand in the defence of its
nearest mate.  The fight had opened at long distance, and the rifles were
cracking steadily.  A quick, snappy sea was being kicked up by the wind,
a condition which prevented fine shooting; and now and again, as we drew
closer, we could see the bullets zip-zipping from wave to wave.

The boat we were pursuing had squared away and was running before the
wind to escape us, and, in the course of its flight, to take part in
repulsing our general boat attack.

Attending to sheets and tacks now left me little time to see what was
taking place, but I happened to be on the poop when Wolf Larsen ordered
the two strange sailors forward and into the forecastle.  They went
sullenly, but they went.  He next ordered Miss Brewster below, and smiled
at the instant horror that leapt into her eyes.

“You’ll find nothing gruesome down there,” he said, “only an unhurt man
securely made fast to the ring-bolts.  Bullets are liable to come aboard,
and I don’t want you killed, you know.”

Even as he spoke, a bullet was deflected by a brass-capped spoke of the
wheel between his hands and screeched off through the air to windward.

“You see,” he said to her; and then to me, “Mr. Van Weyden, will you take
the wheel?”

Maud Brewster had stepped inside the companion-way so that only her head
was exposed.  Wolf Larsen had procured a rifle and was throwing a
cartridge into the barrel.  I begged her with my eyes to go below, but
she smiled and said:

“We may be feeble land-creatures without legs, but we can show Captain
Larsen that we are at least as brave as he.”

He gave her a quick look of admiration.

“I like you a hundred per cent. better for that,” he said.  “Books, and
brains, and bravery.  You are well-rounded, a blue-stocking fit to be the
wife of a pirate chief.  Ahem, we’ll discuss that later,” he smiled, as a
bullet struck solidly into the cabin wall.

I saw his eyes flash golden as he spoke, and I saw the terror mount in
her own.

“We are braver,” I hastened to say.  “At least, speaking for myself, I
know I am braver than Captain Larsen.”

It was I who was now favoured by a quick look.  He was wondering if I
were making fun of him.  I put three or four spokes over to counteract a
sheer toward the wind on the part of the _Ghost_, and then steadied her.
Wolf Larsen was still waiting an explanation, and I pointed down to my
knees.

“You will observe there,” I said, “a slight trembling.  It is because I
am afraid, the flesh is afraid; and I am afraid in my mind because I do
not wish to die.  But my spirit masters the trembling flesh and the
qualms of the mind.  I am more than brave.  I am courageous.  Your flesh
is not afraid.  You are not afraid.  On the one hand, it costs you
nothing to encounter danger; on the other hand, it even gives you
delight.  You enjoy it.  You may be unafraid, Mr. Larsen, but you must
grant that the bravery is mine.”

“You’re right,” he acknowledged at once.  “I never thought of it in that
way before.  But is the opposite true?  If you are braver than I, am I
more cowardly than you?”

We both laughed at the absurdity, and he dropped down to the deck and
rested his rifle across the rail.  The bullets we had received had
travelled nearly a mile, but by now we had cut that distance in half.  He
fired three careful shots.  The first struck fifty feet to windward of
the boat, the second alongside; and at the third the boat-steerer let
loose his steering-oar and crumpled up in the bottom of the boat.

“I guess that’ll fix them,” Wolf Larsen said, rising to his feet.  “I
couldn’t afford to let the hunter have it, and there is a chance the
boat-puller doesn’t know how to steer.  In which case, the hunter cannot
steer and shoot at the same time.”

His reasoning was justified, for the boat rushed at once into the wind
and the hunter sprang aft to take the boat-steerer’s place.  There was no
more shooting, though the rifles were still cracking merrily from the
other boats.

The hunter had managed to get the boat before the wind again, but we ran
down upon it, going at least two feet to its one.  A hundred yards away,
I saw the boat-puller pass a rifle to the hunter.  Wolf Larsen went
amidships and took the coil of the throat-halyards from its pin.  Then he
peered over the rail with levelled rifle.  Twice I saw the hunter let go
the steering-oar with one hand, reach for his rifle, and hesitate.  We
were now alongside and foaming past.

“Here, you!” Wolf Larsen cried suddenly to the boat-puller.  “Take a
turn!”

At the same time he flung the coil of rope.  It struck fairly, nearly
knocking the man over, but he did not obey.  Instead, he looked to his
hunter for orders.  The hunter, in turn, was in a quandary.  His rifle
was between his knees, but if he let go the steering-oar in order to
shoot, the boat would sweep around and collide with the schooner.  Also
he saw Wolf Larsen’s rifle bearing upon him and knew he would be shot ere
he could get his rifle into play.

“Take a turn,” he said quietly to the man.

The boat-puller obeyed, taking a turn around the little forward thwart
and paying the line as it jerked taut.  The boat sheered out with a rush,
and the hunter steadied it to a parallel course some twenty feet from the
side of the _Ghost_.

“Now, get that sail down and come alongside!” Wolf Larsen ordered.

He never let go his rifle, even passing down the tackles with one hand.
When they were fast, bow and stern, and the two uninjured men prepared to
come aboard, the hunter picked up his rifle as if to place it in a secure
position.

“Drop it!” Wolf Larsen cried, and the hunter dropped it as though it were
hot and had burned him.

Once aboard, the two prisoners hoisted in the boat and under Wolf
Larsen’s direction carried the wounded boat-steerer down into the
forecastle.

“If our five boats do as well as you and I have done, we’ll have a pretty
full crew,” Wolf Larsen said to me.

“The man you shot—he is—I hope?” Maud Brewster quavered.

“In the shoulder,” he answered.  “Nothing serious, Mr. Van Weyden will
pull him around as good as ever in three or four weeks.”

“But he won’t pull those chaps around, from the look of it,” he added,
pointing at the _Macedonia’s_ third boat, for which I had been steering
and which was now nearly abreast of us.  “That’s Horner’s and Smoke’s
work.  I told them we wanted live men, not carcasses.  But the joy of
shooting to hit is a most compelling thing, when once you’ve learned how
to shoot.  Ever experienced it, Mr. Van Weyden?”

I shook my head and regarded their work.  It had indeed been bloody, for
they had drawn off and joined our other three boats in the attack on the
remaining two of the enemy.  The deserted boat was in the trough of the
sea, rolling drunkenly across each comber, its loose spritsail out at
right angles to it and fluttering and flapping in the wind.  The hunter
and boat-puller were both lying awkwardly in the bottom, but the
boat-steerer lay across the gunwale, half in and half out, his arms
trailing in the water and his head rolling from side to side.

“Don’t look, Miss Brewster, please don’t look,” I had begged of her, and
I was glad that she had minded me and been spared the sight.

“Head right into the bunch, Mr. Van Weyden,” was Wolf Larsen’s command.

As we drew nearer, the firing ceased, and we saw that the fight was over.
The remaining two boats had been captured by our five, and the seven were
grouped together, waiting to be picked up.

“Look at that!” I cried involuntarily, pointing to the north-east.

The blot of smoke which indicated the _Macedonia’s_ position had
reappeared.

“Yes, I’ve been watching it,” was Wolf Larsen’s calm reply.  He measured
the distance away to the fog-bank, and for an instant paused to feel the
weight of the wind on his cheek.  “We’ll make it, I think; but you can
depend upon it that blessed brother of mine has twigged our little game
and is just a-humping for us.  Ah, look at that!”

The blot of smoke had suddenly grown larger, and it was very black.

“I’ll beat you out, though, brother mine,” he chuckled.  “I’ll beat you
out, and I hope you no worse than that you rack your old engines into
scrap.”

When we hove to, a hasty though orderly confusion reigned.  The boats
came aboard from every side at once.  As fast as the prisoners came over
the rail they were marshalled forward to the forecastle by our hunters,
while our sailors hoisted in the boats, pell-mell, dropping them anywhere
upon the deck and not stopping to lash them.  We were already under way,
all sails set and drawing, and the sheets being slacked off for a wind
abeam, as the last boat lifted clear of the water and swung in the
tackles.

There was need for haste.  The _Macedonia_, belching the blackest of
smoke from her funnel, was charging down upon us from out of the
north-east.  Neglecting the boats that remained to her, she had altered
her course so as to anticipate ours.  She was not running straight for
us, but ahead of us.  Our courses were converging like the sides of an
angle, the vertex of which was at the edge of the fog-bank.  It was
there, or not at all, that the _Macedonia_ could hope to catch us.  The
hope for the _Ghost_ lay in that she should pass that point before the
_Macedonia_ arrived at it.

Wolf Larsen was steering, his eyes glistening and snapping as they dwelt
upon and leaped from detail to detail of the chase.  Now he studied the
sea to windward for signs of the wind slackening or freshening, now the
_Macedonia_; and again, his eyes roved over every sail, and he gave
commands to slack a sheet here a trifle, to come in on one there a
trifle, till he was drawing out of the _Ghost_ the last bit of speed she
possessed.  All feuds and grudges were forgotten, and I was surprised at
the alacrity with which the men who had so long endured his brutality
sprang to execute his orders.  Strange to say, the unfortunate Johnson
came into my mind as we lifted and surged and heeled along, and I was
aware of a regret that he was not alive and present; he had so loved the
_Ghost_ and delighted in her sailing powers.

“Better get your rifles, you fellows,” Wolf Larsen called to our hunters;
and the five men lined the lee rail, guns in hand, and waited.

The _Macedonia_ was now but a mile away, the black smoke pouring from her
funnel at a right angle, so madly she raced, pounding through the sea at
a seventeen-knot gait—“’Sky-hooting through the brine,” as Wolf Larsen
quoted while gazing at her.  We were not making more than nine knots, but
the fog-bank was very near.

A puff of smoke broke from the _Macedonia’s_ deck, we heard a heavy
report, and a round hole took form in the stretched canvas of our
mainsail.  They were shooting at us with one of the small cannon which
rumour had said they carried on board.  Our men, clustering amidships,
waved their hats and raised a derisive cheer.  Again there was a puff of
smoke and a loud report, this time the cannon-ball striking not more than
twenty feet astern and glancing twice from sea to sea to windward ere it
sank.

But there was no rifle-firing for the reason that all their hunters were
out in the boats or our prisoners.  When the two vessels were half-a-mile
apart, a third shot made another hole in our mainsail.  Then we entered
the fog.  It was about us, veiling and hiding us in its dense wet gauze.

The sudden transition was startling.  The moment before we had been
leaping through the sunshine, the clear sky above us, the sea breaking
and rolling wide to the horizon, and a ship, vomiting smoke and fire and
iron missiles, rushing madly upon us.  And at once, as in an instant’s
leap, the sun was blotted out, there was no sky, even our mastheads were
lost to view, and our horizon was such as tear-blinded eyes may see.  The
grey mist drove by us like a rain.  Every woollen filament of our
garments, every hair of our heads and faces, was jewelled with a crystal
globule.  The shrouds were wet with moisture; it dripped from our rigging
overhead; and on the underside of our booms drops of water took shape in
long swaying lines, which were detached and flung to the deck in mimic
showers at each surge of the schooner.  I was aware of a pent, stifled
feeling.  As the sounds of the ship thrusting herself through the waves
were hurled back upon us by the fog, so were one’s thoughts.  The mind
recoiled from contemplation of a world beyond this wet veil which wrapped
us around.  This was the world, the universe itself, its bounds so near
one felt impelled to reach out both arms and push them back.  It was
impossible, that the rest could be beyond these walls of grey.  The rest
was a dream, no more than the memory of a dream.

It was weird, strangely weird.  I looked at Maud Brewster and knew that
she was similarly affected.  Then I looked at Wolf Larsen, but there was
nothing subjective about his state of consciousness.  His whole concern
was with the immediate, objective present.  He still held the wheel, and
I felt that he was timing Time, reckoning the passage of the minutes with
each forward lunge and leeward roll of the _Ghost_.

“Go for’ard and hard alee without any noise,” he said to me in a low
voice.  “Clew up the topsails first.  Set men at all the sheets.  Let
there be no rattling of blocks, no sound of voices.  No noise,
understand, no noise.”

When all was ready, the word “hard-a-lee” was passed forward to me from
man to man; and the _Ghost_ heeled about on the port tack with
practically no noise at all.  And what little there was,—the slapping of
a few reef-points and the creaking of a sheave in a block or two,—was
ghostly under the hollow echoing pall in which we were swathed.

We had scarcely filled away, it seemed, when the fog thinned abruptly and
we were again in the sunshine, the wide-stretching sea breaking before us
to the sky-line.  But the ocean was bare.  No wrathful _Macedonia_ broke
its surface nor blackened the sky with her smoke.

Wolf Larsen at once squared away and ran down along the rim of the
fog-bank.  His trick was obvious.  He had entered the fog to windward of
the steamer, and while the steamer had blindly driven on into the fog in
the chance of catching him, he had come about and out of his shelter and
was now running down to re-enter to leeward.  Successful in this, the old
simile of the needle in the haystack would be mild indeed compared with
his brother’s chance of finding him.  He did not run long.  Jibing the
fore- and main-sails and setting the topsails again, we headed back into
the bank.  As we entered I could have sworn I saw a vague bulk emerging
to windward.  I looked quickly at Wolf Larsen.  Already we were ourselves
buried in the fog, but he nodded his head.  He, too, had seen it—the
_Macedonia_, guessing his manœuvre and failing by a moment in
anticipating it.  There was no doubt that we had escaped unseen.

“He can’t keep this up,” Wolf Larsen said.  “He’ll have to go back for
the rest of his boats.  Send a man to the wheel, Mr. Van Weyden, keep
this course for the present, and you might as well set the watches, for
we won’t do any lingering to-night.”

“I’d give five hundred dollars, though,” he added, “just to be aboard the
_Macedonia_ for five minutes, listening to my brother curse.”

“And now, Mr. Van Weyden,” he said to me when he had been relieved from
the wheel, “we must make these new-comers welcome.  Serve out plenty of
whisky to the hunters and see that a few bottles slip for’ard.  I’ll
wager every man Jack of them is over the side to-morrow, hunting for Wolf
Larsen as contentedly as ever they hunted for Death Larsen.”

“But won’t they escape as Wainwright did?” I asked.

He laughed shrewdly.  “Not as long as our old hunters have anything to
say about it.  I’m dividing amongst them a dollar a skin for all the
skins shot by our new hunters.  At least half of their enthusiasm to-day
was due to that.  Oh, no, there won’t be any escaping if they have
anything to say about it.  And now you’d better get for’ard to your
hospital duties.  There must be a full ward waiting for you.”




CHAPTER XXVI


Wolf Larsen took the distribution of the whisky off my hands, and the
bottles began to make their appearance while I worked over the fresh
batch of wounded men in the forecastle.  I had seen whisky drunk, such as
whisky-and-soda by the men of the clubs, but never as these men drank it,
from pannikins and mugs, and from the bottles—great brimming drinks, each
one of which was in itself a debauch.  But they did not stop at one or
two.  They drank and drank, and ever the bottles slipped forward and they
drank more.

Everybody drank; the wounded drank; Oofty-Oofty, who helped me, drank.
Only Louis refrained, no more than cautiously wetting his lips with the
liquor, though he joined in the revels with an abandon equal to that of
most of them.  It was a saturnalia.  In loud voices they shouted over the
day’s fighting, wrangled about details, or waxed affectionate and made
friends with the men whom they had fought.  Prisoners and captors
hiccoughed on one another’s shoulders, and swore mighty oaths of respect
and esteem.  They wept over the miseries of the past and over the
miseries yet to come under the iron rule of Wolf Larsen.  And all cursed
him and told terrible tales of his brutality.

It was a strange and frightful spectacle—the small, bunk-lined space, the
floor and walls leaping and lurching, the dim light, the swaying shadows
lengthening and fore-shortening monstrously, the thick air heavy with
smoke and the smell of bodies and iodoform, and the inflamed faces of the
men—half-men, I should call them.  I noted Oofty-Oofty, holding the end
of a bandage and looking upon the scene, his velvety and luminous eyes
glistening in the light like a deer’s eyes, and yet I knew the barbaric
devil that lurked in his breast and belied all the softness and
tenderness, almost womanly, of his face and form.  And I noticed the
boyish face of Harrison,—a good face once, but now a demon’s,—convulsed
with passion as he told the new-comers of the hell-ship they were in and
shrieked curses upon the head of Wolf Larsen.

Wolf Larsen it was, always Wolf Larsen, enslaver and tormentor of men, a
male Circe and these his swine, suffering brutes that grovelled before
him and revolted only in drunkenness and in secrecy.  And was I, too, one
of his swine? I thought.  And Maud Brewster?  No!  I ground my teeth in
my anger and determination till the man I was attending winced under my
hand and Oofty-Oofty looked at me with curiosity.  I felt endowed with a
sudden strength.  What of my new-found love, I was a giant.  I feared
nothing.  I would work my will through it all, in spite of Wolf Larsen
and of my own thirty-five bookish years.  All would be well.  I would
make it well.  And so, exalted, upborne by a sense of power, I turned my
back on the howling inferno and climbed to the deck, where the fog
drifted ghostly through the night and the air was sweet and pure and
quiet.

The steerage, where were two wounded hunters, was a repetition of the
forecastle, except that Wolf Larsen was not being cursed; and it was with
a great relief that I again emerged on deck and went aft to the cabin.
Supper was ready, and Wolf Larsen and Maud were waiting for me.

While all his ship was getting drunk as fast as it could, he remained
sober.  Not a drop of liquor passed his lips.  He did not dare it under
the circumstances, for he had only Louis and me to depend upon, and Louis
was even now at the wheel.  We were sailing on through the fog without a
look-out and without lights.  That Wolf Larsen had turned the liquor
loose among his men surprised me, but he evidently knew their psychology
and the best method of cementing in cordiality, what had begun in
bloodshed.

His victory over Death Larsen seemed to have had a remarkable effect upon
him.  The previous evening he had reasoned himself into the blues, and I
had been waiting momentarily for one of his characteristic outbursts.
Yet nothing had occurred, and he was now in splendid trim.  Possibly his
success in capturing so many hunters and boats had counteracted the
customary reaction.  At any rate, the blues were gone, and the blue
devils had not put in an appearance.  So I thought at the time; but, ah
me, little I knew him or knew that even then, perhaps, he was meditating
an outbreak more terrible than any I had seen.

As I say, he discovered himself in splendid trim when I entered the
cabin.  He had had no headaches for weeks, his eyes were clear blue as
the sky, his bronze was beautiful with perfect health; life swelled
through his veins in full and magnificent flood.  While waiting for me he
had engaged Maud in animated discussion.  Temptation was the topic they
had hit upon, and from the few words I heard I made out that he was
contending that temptation was temptation only when a man was seduced by
it and fell.

“For look you,” he was saying, “as I see it, a man does things because of
desire.  He has many desires.  He may desire to escape pain, or to enjoy
pleasure.  But whatever he does, he does because he desires to do it.”

“But suppose he desires to do two opposite things, neither of which will
permit him to do the other?” Maud interrupted.

“The very thing I was coming to,” he said.

“And between these two desires is just where the soul of the man is
manifest,” she went on.  “If it is a good soul, it will desire and do the
good action, and the contrary if it is a bad soul.  It is the soul that
decides.”

“Bosh and nonsense!” he exclaimed impatiently.  “It is the desire that
decides.  Here is a man who wants to, say, get drunk.  Also, he doesn’t
want to get drunk.  What does he do?  How does he do it?  He is a puppet.
He is the creature of his desires, and of the two desires he obeys the
strongest one, that is all.  His soul hasn’t anything to do with it.  How
can he be tempted to get drunk and refuse to get drunk?  If the desire to
remain sober prevails, it is because it is the strongest desire.
Temptation plays no part, unless—” he paused while grasping the new
thought which had come into his mind—“unless he is tempted to remain
sober.

“Ha! ha!” he laughed.  “What do you think of that, Mr. Van Weyden?”

“That both of you are hair-splitting,” I said.  “The man’s soul is his
desires.  Or, if you will, the sum of his desires is his soul.  Therein
you are both wrong.  You lay the stress upon the desire apart from the
soul, Miss Brewster lays the stress on the soul apart from the desire,
and in point of fact soul and desire are the same thing.

“However,” I continued, “Miss Brewster is right in contending that
temptation is temptation whether the man yield or overcome.  Fire is
fanned by the wind until it leaps up fiercely.  So is desire like fire.
It is fanned, as by a wind, by sight of the thing desired, or by a new
and luring description or comprehension of the thing desired.  There lies
the temptation.  It is the wind that fans the desire until it leaps up to
mastery.  That’s temptation.  It may not fan sufficiently to make the
desire overmastering, but in so far as it fans at all, that far is it
temptation.  And, as you say, it may tempt for good as well as for evil.”

I felt proud of myself as we sat down to the table.  My words had been
decisive.  At least they had put an end to the discussion.

But Wolf Larsen seemed voluble, prone to speech as I had never seen him
before.  It was as though he were bursting with pent energy which must
find an outlet somehow.  Almost immediately he launched into a discussion
on love.  As usual, his was the sheer materialistic side, and Maud’s was
the idealistic.  For myself, beyond a word or so of suggestion or
correction now and again, I took no part.

He was brilliant, but so was Maud, and for some time I lost the thread of
the conversation through studying her face as she talked.  It was a face
that rarely displayed colour, but to-night it was flushed and vivacious.
Her wit was playing keenly, and she was enjoying the tilt as much as Wolf
Larsen, and he was enjoying it hugely.  For some reason, though I know
not why in the argument, so utterly had I lost it in the contemplation of
one stray brown lock of Maud’s hair, he quoted from Iseult at Tintagel,
where she says:

   “Blessed am I beyond women even herein,
   That beyond all born women is my sin,
   And perfect my transgression.”

As he had read pessimism into Omar, so now he read triumph, stinging
triumph and exultation, into Swinburne’s lines.  And he read rightly, and
he read well.  He had hardly ceased reading when Louis put his head into
the companion-way and whispered down:

“Be easy, will ye?  The fog’s lifted, an’ ’tis the port light iv a
steamer that’s crossin’ our bow this blessed minute.”

Wolf Larsen sprang on deck, and so swiftly that by the time we followed
him he had pulled the steerage-slide over the drunken clamour and was on
his way forward to close the forecastle-scuttle.  The fog, though it
remained, had lifted high, where it obscured the stars and made the night
quite black.  Directly ahead of us I could see a bright red light and a
white light, and I could hear the pulsing of a steamer’s engines.  Beyond
a doubt it was the _Macedonia_.

Wolf Larsen had returned to the poop, and we stood in a silent group,
watching the lights rapidly cross our bow.

“Lucky for me he doesn’t carry a searchlight,” Wolf Larsen said.

“What if I should cry out loudly?” I queried in a whisper.

“It would be all up,” he answered.  “But have you thought upon what would
immediately happen?”

Before I had time to express any desire to know, he had me by the throat
with his gorilla grip, and by a faint quiver of the muscles—a hint, as it
were—he suggested to me the twist that would surely have broken my neck.
The next moment he had released me and we were gazing at the
_Macedonia’s_ lights.

“What if I should cry out?” Maud asked.

“I like you too well to hurt you,” he said softly—nay, there was a
tenderness and a caress in his voice that made me wince.

“But don’t do it, just the same, for I’d promptly break Mr. Van Weyden’s
neck.”

“Then she has my permission to cry out,” I said defiantly.

“I hardly think you’ll care to sacrifice the Dean of American Letters the
Second,” he sneered.

We spoke no more, though we had become too used to one another for the
silence to be awkward; and when the red light and the white had
disappeared we returned to the cabin to finish the interrupted supper.

Again they fell to quoting, and Maud gave Dowson’s “Impenitentia Ultima.”
She rendered it beautifully, but I watched not her, but Wolf Larsen.  I
was fascinated by the fascinated look he bent upon Maud.  He was quite
out of himself, and I noticed the unconscious movement of his lips as he
shaped word for word as fast as she uttered them.  He interrupted her
when she gave the lines:

   “And her eyes should be my light while the sun went out behind me,
   And the viols in her voice be the last sound in my ear.”

“There are viols in your voice,” he said bluntly, and his eyes flashed
their golden light.

I could have shouted with joy at her control.  She finished the
concluding stanza without faltering and then slowly guided the
conversation into less perilous channels.  And all the while I sat in a
half-daze, the drunken riot of the steerage breaking through the
bulkhead, the man I feared and the woman I loved talking on and on.  The
table was not cleared.  The man who had taken Mugridge’s place had
evidently joined his comrades in the forecastle.

If ever Wolf Larsen attained the summit of living, he attained it then.
From time to time I forsook my own thoughts to follow him, and I followed
in amaze, mastered for the moment by his remarkable intellect, under the
spell of his passion, for he was preaching the passion of revolt.  It was
inevitable that Milton’s Lucifer should be instanced, and the keenness
with which Wolf Larsen analysed and depicted the character was a
revelation of his stifled genius.  It reminded me of Taine, yet I knew
the man had never heard of that brilliant though dangerous thinker.

“He led a lost cause, and he was not afraid of God’s thunderbolts,” Wolf
Larsen was saying.  “Hurled into hell, he was unbeaten.  A third of God’s
angels he had led with him, and straightway he incited man to rebel
against God, and gained for himself and hell the major portion of all the
generations of man.  Why was he beaten out of heaven?  Because he was
less brave than God? less proud? less aspiring?  No!  A thousand times
no!  God was more powerful, as he said, Whom thunder hath made greater.
But Lucifer was a free spirit.  To serve was to suffocate.  He preferred
suffering in freedom to all the happiness of a comfortable servility.  He
did not care to serve God.  He cared to serve nothing.  He was no
figure-head.  He stood on his own legs.  He was an individual.”

“The first Anarchist,” Maud laughed, rising and preparing to withdraw to
her state-room.

“Then it is good to be an anarchist!” he cried.  He, too, had risen, and
he stood facing her, where she had paused at the door of her room, as he
went on:

               “‘Here at least
   We shall be free; the Almighty hath not built
   Here for his envy; will not drive us hence;
   Here we may reign secure; and in my choice
   To reign is worth ambition, though in hell:
   Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven.”

It was the defiant cry of a mighty spirit.  The cabin still rang with his
voice, as he stood there, swaying, his bronzed face shining, his head up
and dominant, and his eyes, golden and masculine, intensely masculine and
insistently soft, flashing upon Maud at the door.

Again that unnamable and unmistakable terror was in her eyes, and she
said, almost in a whisper, “You are Lucifer.”

The door closed and she was gone.  He stood staring after her for a
minute, then returned to himself and to me.

“I’ll relieve Louis at the wheel,” he said shortly, “and call upon you to
relieve at midnight.  Better turn in now and get some sleep.”

He pulled on a pair of mittens, put on his cap, and ascended the
companion-stairs, while I followed his suggestion by going to bed.  For
some unknown reason, prompted mysteriously, I did not undress, but lay
down fully clothed.  For a time I listened to the clamour in the steerage
and marvelled upon the love which had come to me; but my sleep on the
_Ghost_ had become most healthful and natural, and soon the songs and
cries died away, my eyes closed, and my consciousness sank down into the
half-death of slumber.

                                * * * * *

I knew not what had aroused me, but I found myself out of my bunk, on my
feet, wide awake, my soul vibrating to the warning of danger as it might
have thrilled to a trumpet call.  I threw open the door.  The cabin light
was burning low.  I saw Maud, my Maud, straining and struggling and
crushed in the embrace of Wolf Larsen’s arms.  I could see the vain beat
and flutter of her as she strove, pressing her face against his breast,
to escape from him.  All this I saw on the very instant of seeing and as
I sprang forward.

I struck him with my fist, on the face, as he raised his head, but it was
a puny blow.  He roared in a ferocious, animal-like way, and gave me a
shove with his hand.  It was only a shove, a flirt of the wrist, yet so
tremendous was his strength that I was hurled backward as from a
catapult.  I struck the door of the state-room which had formerly been
Mugridge’s, splintering and smashing the panels with the impact of my
body.  I struggled to my feet, with difficulty dragging myself clear of
the wrecked door, unaware of any hurt whatever.  I was conscious only of
an overmastering rage.  I think I, too, cried aloud, as I drew the knife
at my hip and sprang forward a second time.

But something had happened.  They were reeling apart.  I was close upon
him, my knife uplifted, but I withheld the blow.  I was puzzled by the
strangeness of it.  Maud was leaning against the wall, one hand out for
support; but he was staggering, his left hand pressed against his
forehead and covering his eyes, and with the right he was groping about
him in a dazed sort of way.  It struck against the wall, and his body
seemed to express a muscular and physical relief at the contact, as
though he had found his bearings, his location in space as well as
something against which to lean.

Then I saw red again.  All my wrongs and humiliations flashed upon me
with a dazzling brightness, all that I had suffered and others had
suffered at his hands, all the enormity of the man’s very existence.  I
sprang upon him, blindly, insanely, and drove the knife into his
shoulder.  I knew, then, that it was no more than a flesh wound,—I had
felt the steel grate on his shoulder-blade,—and I raised the knife to
strike at a more vital part.

But Maud had seen my first blow, and she cried, “Don’t!  Please don’t!”

I dropped my arm for a moment, and a moment only.  Again the knife was
raised, and Wolf Larsen would have surely died had she not stepped
between.  Her arms were around me, her hair was brushing my face.  My
pulse rushed up in an unwonted manner, yet my rage mounted with it.  She
looked me bravely in the eyes.

“For my sake,” she begged.

“I would kill him for your sake!” I cried, trying to free my arm without
hurting her.

“Hush!” she said, and laid her fingers lightly on my lips.  I could have
kissed them, had I dared, even then, in my rage, the touch of them was so
sweet, so very sweet.  “Please, please,” she pleaded, and she disarmed me
by the words, as I was to discover they would ever disarm me.

I stepped back, separating from her, and replaced the knife in its
sheath.  I looked at Wolf Larsen.  He still pressed his left hand against
his forehead.  It covered his eyes.  His head was bowed.  He seemed to
have grown limp.  His body was sagging at the hips, his great shoulders
were drooping and shrinking forward.

“Van Weyden!” he called hoarsely, and with a note of fright in his
voice.  “Oh, Van Weyden! where are you?”

I looked at Maud.  She did not speak, but nodded her head.

“Here I am,” I answered, stepping to his side.  “What is the matter?”

“Help me to a seat,” he said, in the same hoarse, frightened voice.

“I am a sick man; a very sick man, Hump,” he said, as he left my
sustaining grip and sank into a chair.

His head dropped forward on the table and was buried in his hands.  From
time to time it rocked back and forward as with pain.  Once, when he half
raised it, I saw the sweat standing in heavy drops on his forehead about
the roots of his hair.

“I am a sick man, a very sick man,” he repeated again, and yet once
again.

“What is the matter?” I asked, resting my hand on his shoulder.  “What
can I do for you?”

But he shook my hand off with an irritated movement, and for a long time
I stood by his side in silence.  Maud was looking on, her face awed and
frightened.  What had happened to him we could not imagine.

“Hump,” he said at last, “I must get into my bunk.  Lend me a hand.  I’ll
be all right in a little while.  It’s those damn headaches, I believe.  I
was afraid of them.  I had a feeling—no, I don’t know what I’m talking
about.  Help me into my bunk.”

But when I got him into his bunk he again buried his face in his hands,
covering his eyes, and as I turned to go I could hear him murmuring, “I
am a sick man, a very sick man.”

Maud looked at me inquiringly as I emerged.  I shook my head, saying:

“Something has happened to him.  What, I don’t know.  He is helpless, and
frightened, I imagine, for the first time in his life.  It must have
occurred before he received the knife-thrust, which made only a
superficial wound.  You must have seen what happened.”

She shook her head.  “I saw nothing.  It is just as mysterious to me.  He
suddenly released me and staggered away.  But what shall we do?  What
shall I do?”

“If you will wait, please, until I come back,” I answered.

I went on deck.  Louis was at the wheel.

“You may go for’ard and turn in,” I said, taking it from him.

He was quick to obey, and I found myself alone on the deck of the
_Ghost_.  As quietly as was possible, I clewed up the topsails, lowered
the flying jib and staysail, backed the jib over, and flattened the
mainsail.  Then I went below to Maud.  I placed my finger on my lips for
silence, and entered Wolf Larsen’s room.  He was in the same position in
which I had left him, and his head was rocking—almost writhing—from side
to side.

“Anything I can do for you?” I asked.

He made no reply at first, but on my repeating the question he answered,
“No, no; I’m all right.  Leave me alone till morning.”

But as I turned to go I noted that his head had resumed its rocking
motion.  Maud was waiting patiently for me, and I took notice, with a
thrill of joy, of the queenly poise of her head and her glorious, calm
eyes.  Calm and sure they were as her spirit itself.

“Will you trust yourself to me for a journey of six hundred miles or so?”
I asked.

“You mean—?” she asked, and I knew she had guessed aright.

“Yes, I mean just that,” I replied.  “There is nothing left for us but
the open boat.”

“For me, you mean,” she said.  “You are certainly as safe here as you
have been.”

“No, there is nothing left for us but the open boat,” I iterated stoutly.
“Will you please dress as warmly as you can, at once, and make into a
bundle whatever you wish to bring with you.”

“And make all haste,” I added, as she turned toward her state-room.

The lazarette was directly beneath the cabin, and, opening the trap-door
in the floor and carrying a candle with me, I dropped down and began
overhauling the ship’s stores.  I selected mainly from the canned goods,
and by the time I was ready, willing hands were extended from above to
receive what I passed up.

We worked in silence.  I helped myself also to blankets, mittens,
oilskins, caps, and such things, from the slop-chest.  It was no light
adventure, this trusting ourselves in a small boat to so raw and stormy a
sea, and it was imperative that we should guard ourselves against the
cold and wet.

We worked feverishly at carrying our plunder on deck and depositing it
amidships, so feverishly that Maud, whose strength was hardly a positive
quantity, had to give over, exhausted, and sit on the steps at the break
of the poop.  This did not serve to recover her, and she lay on her back,
on the hard deck, arms stretched out, and whole body relaxed.  It was a
trick I remembered of my sister, and I knew she would soon be herself
again.  I knew, also, that weapons would not come in amiss, and I
re-entered Wolf Larsen’s state-room to get his rifle and shot-gun.  I
spoke to him, but he made no answer, though his head was still rocking
from side to side and he was not asleep.

“Good-bye, Lucifer,” I whispered to myself as I softly closed the door.

Next to obtain was a stock of ammunition,—an easy matter, though I had to
enter the steerage companion-way to do it.  Here the hunters stored the
ammunition-boxes they carried in the boats, and here, but a few feet from
their noisy revels, I took possession of two boxes.

Next, to lower a boat.  Not so simple a task for one man.  Having cast
off the lashings, I hoisted first on the forward tackle, then on the aft,
till the boat cleared the rail, when I lowered away, one tackle and then
the other, for a couple of feet, till it hung snugly, above the water,
against the schooner’s side.  I made certain that it contained the proper
equipment of oars, rowlocks, and sail.  Water was a consideration, and I
robbed every boat aboard of its breaker.  As there were nine boats all
told, it meant that we should have plenty of water, and ballast as well,
though there was the chance that the boat would be overloaded, what of
the generous supply of other things I was taking.

While Maud was passing me the provisions and I was storing them in the
boat, a sailor came on deck from the forecastle.  He stood by the weather
rail for a time (we were lowering over the lee rail), and then sauntered
slowly amidships, where he again paused and stood facing the wind, with
his back toward us.  I could hear my heart beating as I crouched low in
the boat.  Maud had sunk down upon the deck and was, I knew, lying
motionless, her body in the shadow of the bulwark.  But the man never
turned, and, after stretching his arms above his head and yawning
audibly, he retraced his steps to the forecastle scuttle and disappeared.

A few minutes sufficed to finish the loading, and I lowered the boat into
the water.  As I helped Maud over the rail and felt her form close to
mine, it was all I could do to keep from crying out, “I love you!  I love
you!”  Truly Humphrey Van Weyden was at last in love, I thought, as her
fingers clung to mine while I lowered her down to the boat.  I held on to
the rail with one hand and supported her weight with the other, and I was
proud at the moment of the feat.  It was a strength I had not possessed a
few months before, on the day I said good-bye to Charley Furuseth and
started for San Francisco on the ill-fated _Martinez_.

As the boat ascended on a sea, her feet touched and I released her hands.
I cast off the tackles and leaped after her.  I had never rowed in my
life, but I put out the oars and at the expense of much effort got the
boat clear of the _Ghost_.  Then I experimented with the sail.  I had
seen the boat-steerers and hunters set their spritsails many times, yet
this was my first attempt.  What took them possibly two minutes took me
twenty, but in the end I succeeded in setting and trimming it, and with
the steering-oar in my hands hauled on the wind.

“There lies Japan,” I remarked, “straight before us.”

“Humphrey Van Weyden,” she said, “you are a brave man.”

“Nay,” I answered, “it is you who are a brave woman.”

We turned our heads, swayed by a common impulse to see the last of the
_Ghost_.  Her low hull lifted and rolled to windward on a sea; her canvas
loomed darkly in the night; her lashed wheel creaked as the rudder
kicked; then sight and sound of her faded away, and we were alone on the
dark sea.




CHAPTER XXVII


Day broke, grey and chill.  The boat was close-hauled on a fresh breeze
and the compass indicated that we were just making the course which would
bring us to Japan.  Though stoutly mittened, my fingers were cold, and
they pained from the grip on the steering-oar.  My feet were stinging
from the bite of the frost, and I hoped fervently that the sun would
shine.

Before me, in the bottom of the boat, lay Maud.  She, at least, was warm,
for under her and over her were thick blankets.  The top one I had drawn
over her face to shelter it from the night, so I could see nothing but
the vague shape of her, and her light-brown hair, escaped from the
covering and jewelled with moisture from the air.

Long I looked at her, dwelling upon that one visible bit of her as only a
man would who deemed it the most precious thing in the world.  So
insistent was my gaze that at last she stirred under the blankets, the
top fold was thrown back and she smiled out on me, her eyes yet heavy
with sleep.

“Good-morning, Mr. Van Weyden,” she said.  “Have you sighted land yet?”

“No,” I answered, “but we are approaching it at a rate of six miles an
hour.”

She made a _mouè_ of disappointment.

“But that is equivalent to one hundred and forty-four miles in
twenty-four hours,” I added reassuringly.

Her face brightened.  “And how far have we to go?”

“Siberia lies off there,” I said, pointing to the west.  “But to the
south-west, some six hundred miles, is Japan.  If this wind should hold,
we’ll make it in five days.”

“And if it storms?  The boat could not live?”

She had a way of looking one in the eyes and demanding the truth, and
thus she looked at me as she asked the question.

“It would have to storm very hard,” I temporized.

“And if it storms very hard?”

I nodded my head.  “But we may be picked up any moment by a
sealing-schooner.  They are plentifully distributed over this part of the
ocean.”

“Why, you are chilled through!” she cried.  “Look!  You are shivering.
Don’t deny it; you are.  And here I have been lying warm as toast.”

“I don’t see that it would help matters if you, too, sat up and were
chilled,” I laughed.

“It will, though, when I learn to steer, which I certainly shall.”

She sat up and began making her simple toilet.  She shook down her hair,
and it fell about her in a brown cloud, hiding her face and shoulders.
Dear, damp brown hair!  I wanted to kiss it, to ripple it through my
fingers, to bury my face in it.  I gazed entranced, till the boat ran
into the wind and the flapping sail warned me I was not attending to my
duties.  Idealist and romanticist that I was and always had been in spite
of my analytical nature, yet I had failed till now in grasping much of
the physical characteristics of love.  The love of man and woman, I had
always held, was a sublimated something related to spirit, a spiritual
bond that linked and drew their souls together.  The bonds of the flesh
had little part in my cosmos of love.  But I was learning the sweet
lesson for myself that the soul transmuted itself, expressed itself,
through the flesh; that the sight and sense and touch of the loved one’s
hair was as much breath and voice and essence of the spirit as the light
that shone from the eyes and the thoughts that fell from the lips.  After
all, pure spirit was unknowable, a thing to be sensed and divined only;
nor could it express itself in terms of itself.  Jehovah was
anthropomorphic because he could address himself to the Jews only in
terms of their understanding; so he was conceived as in their own image,
as a cloud, a pillar of fire, a tangible, physical something which the
mind of the Israelites could grasp.

And so I gazed upon Maud’s light-brown hair, and loved it, and learned
more of love than all the poets and singers had taught me with all their
songs and sonnets.  She flung it back with a sudden adroit movement, and
her face emerged, smiling.

“Why don’t women wear their hair down always?” I asked.  “It is so much
more beautiful.”

“If it didn’t tangle so dreadfully,” she laughed.  “There!  I’ve lost one
of my precious hair-pins!”

I neglected the boat and had the sail spilling the wind again and again,
such was my delight in following her every movement as she searched
through the blankets for the pin.  I was surprised, and joyfully, that
she was so much the woman, and the display of each trait and mannerism
that was characteristically feminine gave me keener joy.  For I had been
elevating her too highly in my concepts of her, removing her too far from
the plane of the human, and too far from me.  I had been making of her a
creature goddess-like and unapproachable.  So I hailed with delight the
little traits that proclaimed her only woman after all, such as the toss
of the head which flung back the cloud of hair, and the search for the
pin.  She was woman, my kind, on my plane, and the delightful intimacy of
kind, of man and woman, was possible, as well as the reverence and awe in
which I knew I should always hold her.

She found the pin with an adorable little cry, and I turned my attention
more fully to my steering.  I proceeded to experiment, lashing and
wedging the steering-oar until the boat held on fairly well by the wind
without my assistance.  Occasionally it came up too close, or fell off
too freely; but it always recovered itself and in the main behaved
satisfactorily.

“And now we shall have breakfast,” I said.  “But first you must be more
warmly clad.”

I got out a heavy shirt, new from the slop-chest and made from blanket
goods.  I knew the kind, so thick and so close of texture that it could
resist the rain and not be soaked through after hours of wetting.  When
she had slipped this on over her head, I exchanged the boy’s cap she wore
for a man’s cap, large enough to cover her hair, and, when the flap was
turned down, to completely cover her neck and ears.  The effect was
charming.  Her face was of the sort that cannot but look well under all
circumstances.  Nothing could destroy its exquisite oval, its well-nigh
classic lines, its delicately stencilled brows, its large brown eyes,
clear-seeing and calm, gloriously calm.

A puff, slightly stronger than usual, struck us just then.  The boat was
caught as it obliquely crossed the crest of a wave.  It went over
suddenly, burying its gunwale level with the sea and shipping a bucketful
or so of water.  I was opening a can of tongue at the moment, and I
sprang to the sheet and cast it off just in time.  The sail flapped and
fluttered, and the boat paid off.  A few minutes of regulating sufficed
to put it on its course again, when I returned to the preparation of
breakfast.

“It does very well, it seems, though I am not versed in things nautical,”
she said, nodding her head with grave approval at my steering
contrivance.

“But it will serve only when we are sailing by the wind,” I explained.
“When running more freely, with the wind astern abeam, or on the quarter,
it will be necessary for me to steer.”

“I must say I don’t understand your technicalities,” she said, “but I do
your conclusion, and I don’t like it.  You cannot steer night and day and
for ever.  So I shall expect, after breakfast, to receive my first
lesson.  And then you shall lie down and sleep.  We’ll stand watches just
as they do on ships.”

“I don’t see how I am to teach you,” I made protest.  “I am just learning
for myself.  You little thought when you trusted yourself to me that I
had had no experience whatever with small boats.  This is the first time
I have ever been in one.”

“Then we’ll learn together, sir.  And since you’ve had a night’s start
you shall teach me what you have learned.  And now, breakfast.  My! this
air does give one an appetite!”

“No coffee,” I said regretfully, passing her buttered sea-biscuits and a
slice of canned tongue.  “And there will be no tea, no soups, nothing
hot, till we have made land somewhere, somehow.”

After the simple breakfast, capped with a cup of cold water, Maud took
her lesson in steering.  In teaching her I learned quite a deal myself,
though I was applying the knowledge already acquired by sailing the
_Ghost_ and by watching the boat-steerers sail the small boats.  She was
an apt pupil, and soon learned to keep the course, to luff in the puffs
and to cast off the sheet in an emergency.

Having grown tired, apparently, of the task, she relinquished the oar to
me.  I had folded up the blankets, but she now proceeded to spread them
out on the bottom.  When all was arranged snugly, she said:

“Now, sir, to bed.  And you shall sleep until luncheon.  Till
dinner-time,” she corrected, remembering the arrangement on the _Ghost_.

What could I do?  She insisted, and said, “Please, please,” whereupon I
turned the oar over to her and obeyed.  I experienced a positive sensuous
delight as I crawled into the bed she had made with her hands.  The calm
and control which were so much a part of her seemed to have been
communicated to the blankets, so that I was aware of a soft dreaminess
and content, and of an oval face and brown eyes framed in a fisherman’s
cap and tossing against a background now of grey cloud, now of grey sea,
and then I was aware that I had been asleep.

I looked at my watch.  It was one o’clock.  I had slept seven hours!  And
she had been steering seven hours!  When I took the steering-oar I had
first to unbend her cramped fingers.  Her modicum of strength had been
exhausted, and she was unable even to move from her position.  I was
compelled to let go the sheet while I helped her to the nest of blankets
and chafed her hands and arms.

“I am so tired,” she said, with a quick intake of the breath and a sigh,
drooping her head wearily.

But she straightened it the next moment.  “Now don’t scold, don’t you
dare scold,” she cried with mock defiance.

“I hope my face does not appear angry,” I answered seriously; “for I
assure you I am not in the least angry.”

“N-no,” she considered.  “It looks only reproachful.”

“Then it is an honest face, for it looks what I feel.  You were not fair
to yourself, nor to me.  How can I ever trust you again?”

She looked penitent.  “I’ll be good,” she said, as a naughty child might
say it.  “I promise—”

“To obey as a sailor would obey his captain?”

“Yes,” she answered.  “It was stupid of me, I know.”

“Then you must promise something else,” I ventured.

“Readily.”

“That you will not say, ‘Please, please,’ too often; for when you do you
are sure to override my authority.”

She laughed with amused appreciation.  She, too, had noticed the power of
the repeated “please.”

“It is a good word—” I began.

“But I must not overwork it,” she broke in.

But she laughed weakly, and her head drooped again.  I left the oar long
enough to tuck the blankets about her feet and to pull a single fold
across her face.  Alas! she was not strong.  I looked with misgiving
toward the south-west and thought of the six hundred miles of hardship
before us—ay, if it were no worse than hardship.  On this sea a storm
might blow up at any moment and destroy us.  And yet I was unafraid.  I
was without confidence in the future, extremely doubtful, and yet I felt
no underlying fear.  It must come right, it must come right, I repeated
to myself, over and over again.

The wind freshened in the afternoon, raising a stiffer sea and trying the
boat and me severely.  But the supply of food and the nine breakers of
water enabled the boat to stand up to the sea and wind, and I held on as
long as I dared.  Then I removed the sprit, tightly hauling down the peak
of the sail, and we raced along under what sailors call a leg-of-mutton.

Late in the afternoon I sighted a steamer’s smoke on the horizon to
leeward, and I knew it either for a Russian cruiser, or, more likely, the
_Macedonia_ still seeking the _Ghost_.  The sun had not shone all day,
and it had been bitter cold.  As night drew on, the clouds darkened and
the wind freshened, so that when Maud and I ate supper it was with our
mittens on and with me still steering and eating morsels between puffs.

By the time it was dark, wind and sea had become too strong for the boat,
and I reluctantly took in the sail and set about making a drag or
sea-anchor.  I had learned of the device from the talk of the hunters,
and it was a simple thing to manufacture.  Furling the sail and lashing
it securely about the mast, boom, sprit, and two pairs of spare oars, I
threw it overboard.  A line connected it with the bow, and as it floated
low in the water, practically unexposed to the wind, it drifted less
rapidly than the boat.  In consequence it held the boat bow on to the sea
and wind—the safest position in which to escape being swamped when the
sea is breaking into whitecaps.

“And now?” Maud asked cheerfully, when the task was accomplished and I
pulled on my mittens.

“And now we are no longer travelling toward Japan,” I answered.  “Our
drift is to the south-east, or south-south-east, at the rate of at least
two miles an hour.”

“That will be only twenty-four miles,” she urged, “if the wind remains
high all night.”

“Yes, and only one hundred and forty miles if it continues for three days
and nights.”

“But it won’t continue,” she said with easy confidence.  “It will turn
around and blow fair.”

“The sea is the great faithless one.”

“But the wind!” she retorted.  “I have heard you grow eloquent over the
brave trade-wind.”

“I wish I had thought to bring Wolf Larsen’s chronometer and sextant,” I
said, still gloomily.  “Sailing one direction, drifting another
direction, to say nothing of the set of the current in some third
direction, makes a resultant which dead reckoning can never calculate.
Before long we won’t know where we are by five hundred miles.”

Then I begged her pardon and promised I should not be disheartened any
more.  At her solicitation I let her take the watch till midnight,—it was
then nine o’clock, but I wrapped her in blankets and put an oilskin about
her before I lay down.  I slept only cat-naps.  The boat was leaping and
pounding as it fell over the crests, I could hear the seas rushing past,
and spray was continually being thrown aboard.  And still, it was not a
bad night, I mused—nothing to the nights I had been through on the
_Ghost_; nothing, perhaps, to the nights we should go through in this
cockle-shell.  Its planking was three-quarters of an inch thick.  Between
us and the bottom of the sea was less than an inch of wood.

And yet, I aver it, and I aver it again, I was unafraid.  The death which
Wolf Larsen and even Thomas Mugridge had made me fear, I no longer
feared.  The coming of Maud Brewster into my life seemed to have
transformed me.  After all, I thought, it is better and finer to love
than to be loved, if it makes something in life so worth while that one
is not loath to die for it.  I forget my own life in the love of another
life; and yet, such is the paradox, I never wanted so much to live as
right now when I place the least value upon my own life.  I never had so
much reason for living, was my concluding thought; and after that, until
I dozed, I contented myself with trying to pierce the darkness to where I
knew Maud crouched low in the stern-sheets, watchful of the foaming sea
and ready to call me on an instant’s notice.




CHAPTER XXVIII


There is no need of going into an extended recital of our suffering in
the small boat during the many days we were driven and drifted, here and
there, willy-nilly, across the ocean.  The high wind blew from the
north-west for twenty-four hours, when it fell calm, and in the night
sprang up from the south-west.  This was dead in our teeth, but I took in
the sea-anchor and set sail, hauling a course on the wind which took us
in a south-south-easterly direction.  It was an even choice between this
and the west-north-westerly course which the wind permitted; but the warm
airs of the south fanned my desire for a warmer sea and swayed my
decision.

In three hours—it was midnight, I well remember, and as dark as I had
ever seen it on the sea—the wind, still blowing out of the south-west,
rose furiously, and once again I was compelled to set the sea-anchor.

Day broke and found me wan-eyed and the ocean lashed white, the boat
pitching, almost on end, to its drag.  We were in imminent danger of
being swamped by the whitecaps.  As it was, spray and spume came aboard
in such quantities that I bailed without cessation.  The blankets were
soaking.  Everything was wet except Maud, and she, in oilskins, rubber
boots, and sou’wester, was dry, all but her face and hands and a stray
wisp of hair.  She relieved me at the bailing-hole from time to time, and
bravely she threw out the water and faced the storm.  All things are
relative.  It was no more than a stiff blow, but to us, fighting for life
in our frail craft, it was indeed a storm.

Cold and cheerless, the wind beating on our faces, the white seas roaring
by, we struggled through the day.  Night came, but neither of us slept.
Day came, and still the wind beat on our faces and the white seas roared
past.  By the second night Maud was falling asleep from exhaustion.  I
covered her with oilskins and a tarpaulin.  She was comparatively dry,
but she was numb with the cold.  I feared greatly that she might die in
the night; but day broke, cold and cheerless, with the same clouded sky
and beating wind and roaring seas.

I had had no sleep for forty-eight hours.  I was wet and chilled to the
marrow, till I felt more dead than alive.  My body was stiff from
exertion as well as from cold, and my aching muscles gave me the severest
torture whenever I used them, and I used them continually.  And all the
time we were being driven off into the north-east, directly away from
Japan and toward bleak Bering Sea.

And still we lived, and the boat lived, and the wind blew unabated.  In
fact, toward nightfall of the third day it increased a trifle and
something more.  The boat’s bow plunged under a crest, and we came
through quarter-full of water.  I bailed like a madman.  The liability of
shipping another such sea was enormously increased by the water that
weighed the boat down and robbed it of its buoyancy.  And another such
sea meant the end.  When I had the boat empty again I was forced to take
away the tarpaulin which covered Maud, in order that I might lash it down
across the bow.  It was well I did, for it covered the boat fully a third
of the way aft, and three times, in the next several hours, it flung off
the bulk of the down-rushing water when the bow shoved under the seas.

Maud’s condition was pitiable.  She sat crouched in the bottom of the
boat, her lips blue, her face grey and plainly showing the pain she
suffered.  But ever her eyes looked bravely at me, and ever her lips
uttered brave words.

The worst of the storm must have blown that night, though little I
noticed it.  I had succumbed and slept where I sat in the stern-sheets.
The morning of the fourth day found the wind diminished to a gentle
whisper, the sea dying down and the sun shining upon us.  Oh, the blessed
sun!  How we bathed our poor bodies in its delicious warmth, reviving
like bugs and crawling things after a storm.  We smiled again, said
amusing things, and waxed optimistic over our situation.  Yet it was, if
anything, worse than ever.  We were farther from Japan than the night we
left the _Ghost_.  Nor could I more than roughly guess our latitude and
longitude.  At a calculation of a two-mile drift per hour, during the
seventy and odd hours of the storm, we had been driven at least one
hundred and fifty miles to the north-east.  But was such calculated drift
correct?  For all I knew, it might have been four miles per hour instead
of two.  In which case we were another hundred and fifty miles to the
bad.

Where we were I did not know, though there was quite a likelihood that we
were in the vicinity of the _Ghost_.  There were seals about us, and I
was prepared to sight a sealing-schooner at any time.  We did sight one,
in the afternoon, when the north-west breeze had sprung up freshly once
more.  But the strange schooner lost itself on the sky-line and we alone
occupied the circle of the sea.

Came days of fog, when even Maud’s spirit drooped and there were no merry
words upon her lips; days of calm, when we floated on the lonely
immensity of sea, oppressed by its greatness and yet marvelling at the
miracle of tiny life, for we still lived and struggled to live; days of
sleet and wind and snow-squalls, when nothing could keep us warm; or days
of drizzling rain, when we filled our water-breakers from the drip of the
wet sail.

And ever I loved Maud with an increasing love.  She was so many-sided, so
many-mooded—“protean-mooded” I called her.  But I called her this, and
other and dearer things, in my thoughts only.  Though the declaration of
my love urged and trembled on my tongue a thousand times, I knew that it
was no time for such a declaration.  If for no other reason, it was no
time, when one was protecting and trying to save a woman, to ask that
woman for her love.  Delicate as was the situation, not alone in this but
in other ways, I flattered myself that I was able to deal delicately with
it; and also I flattered myself that by look or sign I gave no
advertisement of the love I felt for her.  We were like good comrades,
and we grew better comrades as the days went by.

One thing about her which surprised me was her lack of timidity and fear.
The terrible sea, the frail boat, the storms, the suffering, the
strangeness and isolation of the situation,—all that should have
frightened a robust woman,—seemed to make no impression upon her who had
known life only in its most sheltered and consummately artificial
aspects, and who was herself all fire and dew and mist, sublimated
spirit, all that was soft and tender and clinging in woman.  And yet I am
wrong.  She _was_ timid and afraid, but she possessed courage.  The flesh
and the qualms of the flesh she was heir to, but the flesh bore heavily
only on the flesh.  And she was spirit, first and always spirit,
etherealized essence of life, calm as her calm eyes, and sure of
permanence in the changing order of the universe.

Came days of storm, days and nights of storm, when the ocean menaced us
with its roaring whiteness, and the wind smote our struggling boat with a
Titan’s buffets.  And ever we were flung off, farther and farther, to the
north-east.  It was in such a storm, and the worst that we had
experienced, that I cast a weary glance to leeward, not in quest of
anything, but more from the weariness of facing the elemental strife, and
in mute appeal, almost, to the wrathful powers to cease and let us be.
What I saw I could not at first believe.  Days and nights of
sleeplessness and anxiety had doubtless turned my head.  I looked back at
Maud, to identify myself, as it were, in time and space.  The sight of
her dear wet cheeks, her flying hair, and her brave brown eyes convinced
me that my vision was still healthy.  Again I turned my face to leeward,
and again I saw the jutting promontory, black and high and naked, the
raging surf that broke about its base and beat its front high up with
spouting fountains, the black and forbidden coast-line running toward the
south-east and fringed with a tremendous scarf of white.

“Maud,” I said.  “Maud.”

She turned her head and beheld the sight.

“It cannot be Alaska!” she cried.

“Alas, no,” I answered, and asked, “Can you swim?”

She shook her head.

“Neither can I,” I said.  “So we must get ashore without swimming, in
some opening between the rocks through which we can drive the boat and
clamber out.  But we must be quick, most quick—and sure.”

I spoke with a confidence she knew I did not feel, for she looked at me
with that unfaltering gaze of hers and said:

“I have not thanked you yet for all you have done for me but—”

She hesitated, as if in doubt how best to word her gratitude.

“Well?” I said, brutally, for I was not quite pleased with her thanking
me.

“You might help me,” she smiled.

“To acknowledge your obligations before you die?  Not at all.  We are not
going to die.  We shall land on that island, and we shall be snug and
sheltered before the day is done.”

I spoke stoutly, but I did not believe a word.  Nor was I prompted to lie
through fear.  I felt no fear, though I was sure of death in that boiling
surge amongst the rocks which was rapidly growing nearer.  It was
impossible to hoist sail and claw off that shore.  The wind would
instantly capsize the boat; the seas would swamp it the moment it fell
into the trough; and, besides, the sail, lashed to the spare oars,
dragged in the sea ahead of us.

As I say, I was not afraid to meet my own death, there, a few hundred
yards to leeward; but I was appalled at the thought that Maud must die.
My cursed imagination saw her beaten and mangled against the rocks, and
it was too terrible.  I strove to compel myself to think we would make
the landing safely, and so I spoke, not what I believed, but what I
preferred to believe.

I recoiled before contemplation of that frightful death, and for a moment
I entertained the wild idea of seizing Maud in my arms and leaping
overboard.  Then I resolved to wait, and at the last moment, when we
entered on the final stretch, to take her in my arms and proclaim my
love, and, with her in my embrace, to make the desperate struggle and
die.

Instinctively we drew closer together in the bottom of the boat.  I felt
her mittened hand come out to mine.  And thus, without speech, we waited
the end.  We were not far off the line the wind made with the western
edge of the promontory, and I watched in the hope that some set of the
current or send of the sea would drift us past before we reached the
surf.

“We shall go clear,” I said, with a confidence which I knew deceived
neither of us.

“By God, we _will_ go clear!” I cried, five minutes later.

The oath left my lips in my excitement—the first, I do believe, in my
life, unless “trouble it,” an expletive of my youth, be accounted an
oath.

“I beg your pardon,” I said.

“You have convinced me of your sincerity,” she said, with a faint smile.
“I do know, now, that we shall go clear.”

I had seen a distant headland past the extreme edge of the promontory,
and as we looked we could see grow the intervening coastline of what was
evidently a deep cove.  At the same time there broke upon our ears a
continuous and mighty bellowing.  It partook of the magnitude and volume
of distant thunder, and it came to us directly from leeward, rising above
the crash of the surf and travelling directly in the teeth of the storm.
As we passed the point the whole cove burst upon our view, a half-moon of
white sandy beach upon which broke a huge surf, and which was covered
with myriads of seals.  It was from them that the great bellowing went
up.

“A rookery!” I cried.  “Now are we indeed saved.  There must be men and
cruisers to protect them from the seal-hunters.  Possibly there is a
station ashore.”

But as I studied the surf which beat upon the beach, I said, “Still bad,
but not so bad.  And now, if the gods be truly kind, we shall drift by
that next headland and come upon a perfectly sheltered beach, where we
may land without wetting our feet.”

And the gods were kind.  The first and second headlands were directly in
line with the south-west wind; but once around the second,—and we went
perilously near,—we picked up the third headland, still in line with the
wind and with the other two.  But the cove that intervened!  It
penetrated deep into the land, and the tide, setting in, drifted us under
the shelter of the point.  Here the sea was calm, save for a heavy but
smooth ground-swell, and I took in the sea-anchor and began to row.  From
the point the shore curved away, more and more to the south and west,
until at last it disclosed a cove within the cove, a little land-locked
harbour, the water level as a pond, broken only by tiny ripples where
vagrant breaths and wisps of the storm hurtled down from over the
frowning wall of rock that backed the beach a hundred feet inshore.

Here were no seals whatever.  The boat’s stern touched the hard shingle.
I sprang out, extending my hand to Maud.  The next moment she was beside
me.  As my fingers released hers, she clutched for my arm hastily.  At
the same moment I swayed, as about to fall to the sand.  This was the
startling effect of the cessation of motion.  We had been so long upon
the moving, rocking sea that the stable land was a shock to us.  We
expected the beach to lift up this way and that, and the rocky walls to
swing back and forth like the sides of a ship; and when we braced
ourselves, automatically, for these various expected movements, their
non-occurrence quite overcame our equilibrium.

“I really must sit down,” Maud said, with a nervous laugh and a dizzy
gesture, and forthwith she sat down on the sand.

I attended to making the boat secure and joined her.  Thus we landed on
Endeavour Island, as we came to it, land-sick from long custom of the
sea.




CHAPTER XXIX


“Fool!” I cried aloud in my vexation.

I had unloaded the boat and carried its contents high up on the beach,
where I had set about making a camp.  There was driftwood, though not
much, on the beach, and the sight of a coffee tin I had taken from the
_Ghost’s_ larder had given me the idea of a fire.

“Blithering idiot!” I was continuing.

But Maud said, “Tut, tut,” in gentle reproval, and then asked why I was a
blithering idiot.

“No matches,” I groaned.  “Not a match did I bring.  And now we shall
have no hot coffee, soup, tea, or anything!”

“Wasn’t it—er—Crusoe who rubbed sticks together?” she drawled.

“But I have read the personal narratives of a score of shipwrecked men
who tried, and tried in vain,” I answered.  “I remember Winters, a
newspaper fellow with an Alaskan and Siberian reputation.  Met him at the
Bibelot once, and he was telling us how he attempted to make a fire with
a couple of sticks.  It was most amusing.  He told it inimitably, but it
was the story of a failure.  I remember his conclusion, his black eyes
flashing as he said, ‘Gentlemen, the South Sea Islander may do it, the
Malay may do it, but take my word it’s beyond the white man.’”

“Oh, well, we’ve managed so far without it,” she said cheerfully.  “And
there’s no reason why we cannot still manage without it.”

“But think of the coffee!” I cried.  “It’s good coffee, too, I know.  I
took it from Larsen’s private stores.  And look at that good wood.”

I confess, I wanted the coffee badly; and I learned, not long afterward,
that the berry was likewise a little weakness of Maud’s.  Besides, we had
been so long on a cold diet that we were numb inside as well as out.
Anything warm would have been most gratifying.  But I complained no more
and set about making a tent of the sail for Maud.

I had looked upon it as a simple task, what of the oars, mast, boom, and
sprit, to say nothing of plenty of lines.  But as I was without
experience, and as every detail was an experiment and every successful
detail an invention, the day was well gone before her shelter was an
accomplished fact.  And then, that night, it rained, and she was flooded
out and driven back into the boat.

The next morning I dug a shallow ditch around the tent, and, an hour
later, a sudden gust of wind, whipping over the rocky wall behind us,
picked up the tent and smashed it down on the sand thirty yards away.

Maud laughed at my crestfallen expression, and I said, “As soon as the
wind abates I intend going in the boat to explore the island.  There must
be a station somewhere, and men.  And ships must visit the station.  Some
Government must protect all these seals.  But I wish to have you
comfortable before I start.”

“I should like to go with you,” was all she said.

“It would be better if you remained.  You have had enough of hardship.
It is a miracle that you have survived.  And it won’t be comfortable in
the boat rowing and sailing in this rainy weather.  What you need is
rest, and I should like you to remain and get it.”

Something suspiciously akin to moistness dimmed her beautiful eyes before
she dropped them and partly turned away her head.

“I should prefer going with you,” she said in a low voice, in which there
was just a hint of appeal.

“I might be able to help you a—” her voice broke,—“a little.  And if
anything should happen to you, think of me left here alone.”

“Oh, I intend being very careful,” I answered.  “And I shall not go so
far but what I can get back before night.  Yes, all said and done, I
think it vastly better for you to remain, and sleep, and rest and do
nothing.”

She turned and looked me in the eyes.  Her gaze was unfaltering, but
soft.

“Please, please,” she said, oh, so softly.

I stiffened myself to refuse, and shook my head.  Still she waited and
looked at me.  I tried to word my refusal, but wavered.  I saw the glad
light spring into her eyes and knew that I had lost.  It was impossible
to say no after that.

The wind died down in the afternoon, and we were prepared to start the
following morning.  There was no way of penetrating the island from our
cove, for the walls rose perpendicularly from the beach, and, on either
side of the cove, rose from the deep water.

Morning broke dull and grey, but calm, and I was awake early and had the
boat in readiness.

“Fool!  Imbecile!  Yahoo!” I shouted, when I thought it was meet to
arouse Maud; but this time I shouted in merriment as I danced about the
beach, bareheaded, in mock despair.

Her head appeared under the flap of the sail.

“What now?” she asked sleepily, and, withal, curiously.

“Coffee!” I cried.  “What do you say to a cup of coffee? hot coffee?
piping hot?”

“My!” she murmured, “you startled me, and you are cruel.  Here I have
been composing my soul to do without it, and here you are vexing me with
your vain suggestions.”

“Watch me,” I said.

From under clefts among the rocks I gathered a few dry sticks and chips.
These I whittled into shavings or split into kindling.  From my note-book
I tore out a page, and from the ammunition box took a shot-gun shell.
Removing the wads from the latter with my knife, I emptied the powder on
a flat rock.  Next I pried the primer, or cap, from the shell, and laid
it on the rock, in the midst of the scattered powder.  All was ready.
Maud still watched from the tent.  Holding the paper in my left hand, I
smashed down upon the cap with a rock held in my right.  There was a puff
of white smoke, a burst of flame, and the rough edge of the paper was
alight.

Maud clapped her hands gleefully.  “Prometheus!” she cried.

But I was too occupied to acknowledge her delight.  The feeble flame must
be cherished tenderly if it were to gather strength and live.  I fed it,
shaving by shaving, and sliver by sliver, till at last it was snapping
and crackling as it laid hold of the smaller chips and sticks.  To be
cast away on an island had not entered into my calculations, so we were
without a kettle or cooking utensils of any sort; but I made shift with
the tin used for bailing the boat, and later, as we consumed our supply
of canned goods, we accumulated quite an imposing array of cooking
vessels.

I boiled the water, but it was Maud who made the coffee.  And how good it
was!  My contribution was canned beef fried with crumbled sea-biscuit and
water.  The breakfast was a success, and we sat about the fire much
longer than enterprising explorers should have done, sipping the hot
black coffee and talking over our situation.

I was confident that we should find a station in some one of the coves,
for I knew that the rookeries of Bering Sea were thus guarded; but Maud
advanced the theory—to prepare me for disappointment, I do believe, if
disappointment were to come—that we had discovered an unknown rookery.
She was in very good spirits, however, and made quite merry in accepting
our plight as a grave one.

“If you are right,” I said, “then we must prepare to winter here.  Our
food will not last, but there are the seals.  They go away in the fall,
so I must soon begin to lay in a supply of meat.  Then there will be huts
to build and driftwood to gather.  Also we shall try out seal fat for
lighting purposes.  Altogether, we’ll have our hands full if we find the
island uninhabited.  Which we shall not, I know.”

But she was right.  We sailed with a beam wind along the shore, searching
the coves with our glasses and landing occasionally, without finding a
sign of human life.  Yet we learned that we were not the first who had
landed on Endeavour Island.  High up on the beach of the second cove from
ours, we discovered the splintered wreck of a boat—a sealer’s boat, for
the rowlocks were bound in sennit, a gun-rack was on the starboard side
of the bow, and in white letters was faintly visible _Gazelle_ No. 2.
The boat had lain there for a long time, for it was half filled with
sand, and the splintered wood had that weather-worn appearance due to
long exposure to the elements.  In the stern-sheets I found a rusty
ten-gauge shot-gun and a sailor’s sheath-knife broken short across and so
rusted as to be almost unrecognizable.

“They got away,” I said cheerfully; but I felt a sinking at the heart and
seemed to divine the presence of bleached bones somewhere on that beach.

I did not wish Maud’s spirits to be dampened by such a find, so I turned
seaward again with our boat and skirted the north-eastern point of the
island.  There were no beaches on the southern shore, and by early
afternoon we rounded the black promontory and completed the
circumnavigation of the island.  I estimated its circumference at
twenty-five miles, its width as varying from two to five miles; while my
most conservative calculation placed on its beaches two hundred thousand
seals.  The island was highest at its extreme south-western point, the
headlands and backbone diminishing regularly until the north-eastern
portion was only a few feet above the sea.  With the exception of our
little cove, the other beaches sloped gently back for a distance of
half-a-mile or so, into what I might call rocky meadows, with here and
there patches of moss and tundra grass.  Here the seals hauled out, and
the old bulls guarded their harems, while the young bulls hauled out by
themselves.

This brief description is all that Endeavour Island merits.  Damp and
soggy where it was not sharp and rocky, buffeted by storm winds and
lashed by the sea, with the air continually a-tremble with the bellowing
of two hundred thousand amphibians, it was a melancholy and miserable
sojourning-place.  Maud, who had prepared me for disappointment, and who
had been sprightly and vivacious all day, broke down as we landed in our
own little cove.  She strove bravely to hide it from me, but while I was
kindling another fire I knew she was stifling her sobs in the blankets
under the sail-tent.

It was my turn to be cheerful, and I played the part to the best of my
ability, and with such success that I brought the laughter back into her
dear eyes and song on her lips; for she sang to me before she went to an
early bed.  It was the first time I had heard her sing, and I lay by the
fire, listening and transported, for she was nothing if not an artist in
everything she did, and her voice, though not strong, was wonderfully
sweet and expressive.

I still slept in the boat, and I lay awake long that night, gazing up at
the first stars I had seen in many nights and pondering the situation.
Responsibility of this sort was a new thing to me.  Wolf Larsen had been
quite right.  I had stood on my father’s legs.  My lawyers and agents had
taken care of my money for me.  I had had no responsibilities at all.
Then, on the _Ghost_ I had learned to be responsible for myself.  And
now, for the first time in my life, I found myself responsible for some
one else.  And it was required of me that this should be the gravest of
responsibilities, for she was the one woman in the world—the one small
woman, as I loved to think of her.




CHAPTER XXX


No wonder we called it Endeavour Island.  For two weeks we toiled at
building a hut.  Maud insisted on helping, and I could have wept over her
bruised and bleeding hands.  And still, I was proud of her because of it.
There was something heroic about this gently-bred woman enduring our
terrible hardship and with her pittance of strength bending to the tasks
of a peasant woman.  She gathered many of the stones which I built into
the walls of the hut; also, she turned a deaf ear to my entreaties when I
begged her to desist.  She compromised, however, by taking upon herself
the lighter labours of cooking and gathering driftwood and moss for our
winter’s supply.

The hut’s walls rose without difficulty, and everything went smoothly
until the problem of the roof confronted me.  Of what use the four walls
without a roof?  And of what could a roof be made?  There were the spare
oars, very true.  They would serve as roof-beams; but with what was I to
cover them?  Moss would never do.  Tundra grass was impracticable.  We
needed the sail for the boat, and the tarpaulin had begun to leak.

“Winters used walrus skins on his hut,” I said.

“There are the seals,” she suggested.

So next day the hunting began.  I did not know how to shoot, but I
proceeded to learn.  And when I had expended some thirty shells for three
seals, I decided that the ammunition would be exhausted before I acquired
the necessary knowledge.  I had used eight shells for lighting fires
before I hit upon the device of banking the embers with wet moss, and
there remained not over a hundred shells in the box.

“We must club the seals,” I announced, when convinced of my poor
marksmanship.  “I have heard the sealers talk about clubbing them.”

“They are so pretty,” she objected.  “I cannot bear to think of it being
done.  It is so directly brutal, you know; so different from shooting
them.”

“That roof must go on,” I answered grimly.  “Winter is almost here.  It
is our lives against theirs.  It is unfortunate we haven’t plenty of
ammunition, but I think, anyway, that they suffer less from being clubbed
than from being all shot up.  Besides, I shall do the clubbing.”

“That’s just it,” she began eagerly, and broke off in sudden confusion.

“Of course,” I began, “if you prefer—”

“But what shall I be doing?” she interrupted, with that softness I knew
full well to be insistence.

“Gathering firewood and cooking dinner,” I answered lightly.

She shook her head.  “It is too dangerous for you to attempt alone.”

“I know, I know,” she waived my protest.  “I am only a weak woman, but
just my small assistance may enable you to escape disaster.”

“But the clubbing?” I suggested.

“Of course, you will do that.  I shall probably scream.  I’ll look away
when—”

“The danger is most serious,” I laughed.

“I shall use my judgment when to look and when not to look,” she replied
with a grand air.

The upshot of the affair was that she accompanied me next morning.  I
rowed into the adjoining cove and up to the edge of the beach.  There
were seals all about us in the water, and the bellowing thousands on the
beach compelled us to shout at each other to make ourselves heard.

“I know men club them,” I said, trying to reassure myself, and gazing
doubtfully at a large bull, not thirty feet away, upreared on his
fore-flippers and regarding me intently.  “But the question is, How do
they club them?”

“Let us gather tundra grass and thatch the roof,” Maud said.

She was as frightened as I at the prospect, and we had reason to be
gazing at close range at the gleaming teeth and dog-like mouths.

“I always thought they were afraid of men,” I said.

“How do I know they are not afraid?” I queried a moment later, after
having rowed a few more strokes along the beach.  “Perhaps, if I were to
step boldly ashore, they would cut for it, and I could not catch up with
one.”  And still I hesitated.

“I heard of a man, once, who invaded the nesting grounds of wild geese,”
Maud said.  “They killed him.”

“The geese?”

“Yes, the geese.  My brother told me about it when I was a little girl.”

“But I know men club them,” I persisted.

“I think the tundra grass will make just as good a roof,” she said.

Far from her intention, her words were maddening me, driving me on.  I
could not play the coward before her eyes.  “Here goes,” I said, backing
water with one oar and running the bow ashore.

I stepped out and advanced valiantly upon a long-maned bull in the midst
of his wives.  I was armed with the regular club with which the
boat-pullers killed the wounded seals gaffed aboard by the hunters.  It
was only a foot and a half long, and in my superb ignorance I never
dreamed that the club used ashore when raiding the rookeries measured
four to five feet.  The cows lumbered out of my way, and the distance
between me and the bull decreased.  He raised himself on his flippers
with an angry movement.  We were a dozen feet apart.  Still I advanced
steadily, looking for him to turn tail at any moment and run.

At six feet the panicky thought rushed into my mind, What if he will not
run?  Why, then I shall club him, came the answer.  In my fear I had
forgotten that I was there to get the bull instead of to make him run.
And just then he gave a snort and a snarl and rushed at me.  His eyes
were blazing, his mouth was wide open; the teeth gleamed cruelly white.
Without shame, I confess that it was I who turned and footed it.  He ran
awkwardly, but he ran well.  He was but two paces behind when I tumbled
into the boat, and as I shoved off with an oar his teeth crunched down
upon the blade.  The stout wood was crushed like an egg-shell.  Maud and
I were astounded.  A moment later he had dived under the boat, seized the
keel in his mouth, and was shaking the boat violently.

“My!” said Maud.  “Let’s go back.”

I shook my head.  “I can do what other men have done, and I know that
other men have clubbed seals.  But I think I’ll leave the bulls alone
next time.”

“I wish you wouldn’t,” she said.

“Now don’t say, ‘Please, please,’” I cried, half angrily, I do believe.

She made no reply, and I knew my tone must have hurt her.

“I beg your pardon,” I said, or shouted, rather, in order to make myself
heard above the roar of the rookery.  “If you say so, I’ll turn and go
back; but honestly, I’d rather stay.”

“Now don’t say that this is what you get for bringing a woman along,” she
said.  She smiled at me whimsically, gloriously, and I knew there was no
need for forgiveness.

I rowed a couple of hundred feet along the beach so as to recover my
nerves, and then stepped ashore again.

“Do be cautious,” she called after me.

I nodded my head and proceeded to make a flank attack on the nearest
harem.  All went well until I aimed a blow at an outlying cow's head and
fell short.  She snorted and tried to scramble away.  I ran in close and
struck another blow, hitting the shoulder instead of the head.

“Watch out!” I heard Maud scream.

In my excitement I had not been taking notice of other things, and I
looked up to see the lord of the harem charging down upon me.  Again I
fled to the boat, hotly pursued; but this time Maud made no suggestion of
turning back.

“It would be better, I imagine, if you let harems alone and devoted your
attention to lonely and inoffensive-looking seals,” was what she said.
“I think I have read something about them.  Dr. Jordan’s book, I believe.
They are the young bulls, not old enough to have harems of their own.  He
called them the holluschickie, or something like that.  It seems to me if
we find where they haul out—”

“It seems to me that your fighting instinct is aroused,” I laughed.

She flushed quickly and prettily.  “I’ll admit I don’t like defeat any
more than you do, or any more than I like the idea of killing such
pretty, inoffensive creatures.”

“Pretty!” I sniffed.  “I failed to mark anything pre-eminently pretty
about those foamy-mouthed beasts that raced me.”

“Your point of view,” she laughed.  “You lacked perspective.  Now if you
did not have to get so close to the subject—”

“The very thing!” I cried.  “What I need is a longer club.  And there’s
that broken oar ready to hand.”

“It just comes to me,” she said, “that Captain Larsen was telling me how
the men raided the rookeries.  They drive the seals, in small herds, a
short distance inland before they kill them.”

“I don’t care to undertake the herding of one of those harems,” I
objected.

“But there are the holluschickie,” she said.  “The holluschickie haul out
by themselves, and Dr. Jordan says that paths are left between the
harems, and that as long as the holluschickie keep strictly to the path
they are unmolested by the masters of the harem.”

“There’s one now,” I said, pointing to a young bull in the water.  “Let’s
watch him, and follow him if he hauls out.”

He swam directly to the beach and clambered out into a small opening
between two harems, the masters of which made warning noises but did not
attack him.  We watched him travel slowly inward, threading about among
the harems along what must have been the path.

“Here goes,” I said, stepping out; but I confess my heart was in my mouth
as I thought of going through the heart of that monstrous herd.

“It would be wise to make the boat fast,” Maud said.

She had stepped out beside me, and I regarded her with wonderment.

She nodded her head determinedly.  “Yes, I’m going with you, so you may
as well secure the boat and arm me with a club.”

“Let’s go back,” I said dejectedly.  “I think tundra grass, will do,
after all.”

“You know it won’t,” was her reply.  “Shall I lead?”

With a shrug of the shoulders, but with the warmest admiration and pride
at heart for this woman, I equipped her with the broken oar and took
another for myself.  It was with nervous trepidation that we made the
first few rods of the journey.  Once Maud screamed in terror as a cow
thrust an inquisitive nose toward her foot, and several times I quickened
my pace for the same reason.  But, beyond warning coughs from either
side, there were no signs of hostility.  It was a rookery which had never
been raided by the hunters, and in consequence the seals were
mild-tempered and at the same time unafraid.

In the very heart of the herd the din was terrific.  It was almost
dizzying in its effect.  I paused and smiled reassuringly at Maud, for I
had recovered my equanimity sooner than she.  I could see that she was
still badly frightened.  She came close to me and shouted:

“I’m dreadfully afraid!”

And I was not.  Though the novelty had not yet worn off, the peaceful
comportment of the seals had quieted my alarm.  Maud was trembling.

“I’m afraid, and I’m not afraid,” she chattered with shaking jaws.  “It’s
my miserable body, not I.”

“It’s all right, it’s all right,” I reassured her, my arm passing
instinctively and protectingly around her.

I shall never forget, in that moment, how instantly conscious I became of
my manhood.  The primitive deeps of my nature stirred.  I felt myself
masculine, the protector of the weak, the fighting male.  And, best of
all, I felt myself the protector of my loved one.  She leaned against me,
so light and lily-frail, and as her trembling eased away it seemed as
though I became aware of prodigious strength.  I felt myself a match for
the most ferocious bull in the herd, and I know, had such a bull charged
upon me, that I should have met it unflinchingly and quite coolly, and I
know that I should have killed it.

“I am all right now,” she said, looking up at me gratefully.  “Let us go
on.”

And that the strength in me had quieted her and given her confidence,
filled me with an exultant joy.  The youth of the race seemed burgeoning
in me, over-civilized man that I was, and I lived for myself the old
hunting days and forest nights of my remote and forgotten ancestry.  I
had much for which to thank Wolf Larsen, was my thought as we went along
the path between the jostling harems.

A quarter of a mile inland we came upon the holluschickie—sleek young
bulls, living out the loneliness of their bachelorhood and gathering
strength against the day when they would fight their way into the ranks
of the Benedicts.

Everything now went smoothly.  I seemed to know just what to do and how
to do it.  Shouting, making threatening gestures with my club, and even
prodding the lazy ones, I quickly cut out a score of the young bachelors
from their companions.  Whenever one made an attempt to break back toward
the water, I headed it off.  Maud took an active part in the drive, and
with her cries and flourishings of the broken oar was of considerable
assistance.  I noticed, though, that whenever one looked tired and
lagged, she let it slip past.  But I noticed, also, whenever one, with a
show of fight, tried to break past, that her eyes glinted and showed
bright, and she rapped it smartly with her club.

“My, it’s exciting!” she cried, pausing from sheer weakness.  “I think
I’ll sit down.”

I drove the little herd (a dozen strong, now, what of the escapes she had
permitted) a hundred yards farther on; and by the time she joined me I
had finished the slaughter and was beginning to skin.  An hour later we
went proudly back along the path between the harems.  And twice again we
came down the path burdened with skins, till I thought we had enough to
roof the hut.  I set the sail, laid one tack out of the cove, and on the
other tack made our own little inner cove.

“It’s just like home-coming,” Maud said, as I ran the boat ashore.

I heard her words with a responsive thrill, it was all so dearly intimate
and natural, and I said:

“It seems as though I have lived this life always.  The world of books
and bookish folk is very vague, more like a dream memory than an
actuality.  I surely have hunted and forayed and fought all the days of
my life.  And you, too, seem a part of it.  You are—”  I was on the verge
of saying, “my woman, my mate,” but glibly changed it to—“standing the
hardship well.”

But her ear had caught the flaw.  She recognized a flight that midmost
broke.  She gave me a quick look.

“Not that.  You were saying—?”

“That the American Mrs. Meynell was living the life of a savage and
living it quite successfully,” I said easily.

“Oh,” was all she replied; but I could have sworn there was a note of
disappointment in her voice.

But “my woman, my mate” kept ringing in my head for the rest of the day
and for many days.  Yet never did it ring more loudly than that night, as
I watched her draw back the blanket of moss from the coals, blow up the
fire, and cook the evening meal.  It must have been latent savagery
stirring in me, for the old words, so bound up with the roots of the
race, to grip me and thrill me.  And grip and thrill they did, till I
fell asleep, murmuring them to myself over and over again.




CHAPTER XXXI


“It will smell,” I said, “but it will keep in the heat and keep out the
rain and snow.”

We were surveying the completed seal-skin roof.

“It is clumsy, but it will serve the purpose, and that is the main
thing,” I went on, yearning for her praise.

And she clapped her hands and declared that she was hugely pleased.

“But it is dark in here,” she said the next moment, her shoulders
shrinking with a little involuntary shiver.

“You might have suggested a window when the walls were going up,” I said.
“It was for you, and you should have seen the need of a window.”

“But I never do see the obvious, you know,” she laughed back.  “And
besides, you can knock a hole in the wall at any time.”

“Quite true; I had not thought of it,” I replied, wagging my head sagely.
“But have you thought of ordering the window-glass?  Just call up the
firm,—Red, 4451, I think it is,—and tell them what size and kind of glass
you wish.”

“That means—” she began.

“No window.”

It was a dark and evil-appearing thing, that hut, not fit for aught
better than swine in a civilized land; but for us, who had known the
misery of the open boat, it was a snug little habitation.  Following the
housewarming, which was accomplished by means of seal-oil and a wick made
from cotton calking, came the hunting for our winter’s meat and the
building of the second hut.  It was a simple affair, now, to go forth in
the morning and return by noon with a boatload of seals.  And then, while
I worked at building the hut, Maud tried out the oil from the blubber and
kept a slow fire under the frames of meat.  I had heard of jerking beef
on the plains, and our seal-meat, cut in thin strips and hung in the
smoke, cured excellently.

The second hut was easier to erect, for I built it against the first, and
only three walls were required.  But it was work, hard work, all of it.
Maud and I worked from dawn till dark, to the limit of our strength, so
that when night came we crawled stiffly to bed and slept the animal-like
sleep of exhaustion.  And yet Maud declared that she had never felt better
or stronger in her life.  I knew this was true of myself, but hers was
such a lily strength that I feared she would break down.  Often and
often, her last-reserve force gone, I have seen her stretched flat on her
back on the sand in the way she had of resting and recuperating.  And
then she would be up on her feet and toiling hard as ever.  Where she
obtained this strength was the marvel to me.

“Think of the long rest this winter,” was her reply to my remonstrances.
“Why, we’ll be clamorous for something to do.”

We held a housewarming in my hut the night it was roofed.  It was the end
of the third day of a fierce storm which had swung around the compass
from the south-east to the north-west, and which was then blowing
directly in upon us.  The beaches of the outer cove were thundering with
the surf, and even in our land-locked inner cove a respectable sea was
breaking.  No high backbone of island sheltered us from the wind, and it
whistled and bellowed about the hut till at times I feared for the
strength of the walls.  The skin roof, stretched tightly as a drumhead, I
had thought, sagged and bellied with every gust; and innumerable
interstices in the walls, not so tightly stuffed with moss as Maud had
supposed, disclosed themselves.  Yet the seal-oil burned brightly and we
were warm and comfortable.

It was a pleasant evening indeed, and we voted that as a social function
on Endeavour Island it had not yet been eclipsed.  Our minds were at
ease.  Not only had we resigned ourselves to the bitter winter, but we
were prepared for it.  The seals could depart on their mysterious journey
into the south at any time, now, for all we cared; and the storms held no
terror for us.  Not only were we sure of being dry and warm and sheltered
from the wind, but we had the softest and most luxurious mattresses that
could be made from moss.  This had been Maud’s idea, and she had herself
jealously gathered all the moss.  This was to be my first night on the
mattress, and I knew I should sleep the sweeter because she had made it.

As she rose to go she turned to me with the whimsical way she had, and
said:

“Something is going to happen—is happening, for that matter.  I feel it.
Something is coming here, to us.  It is coming now.  I don’t know what,
but it is coming.”

“Good or bad?” I asked.

She shook her head.  “I don’t know, but it is there, somewhere.”

She pointed in the direction of the sea and wind.

“It’s a lee shore,” I laughed, “and I am sure I’d rather be here than
arriving, a night like this.”

“You are not frightened?” I asked, as I stepped to open the door for her.

Her eyes looked bravely into mine.

“And you feel well? perfectly well?”

“Never better,” was her answer.

We talked a little longer before she went.

“Good-night, Maud,” I said.

“Good-night, Humphrey,” she said.

This use of our given names had come about quite as a matter of course,
and was as unpremeditated as it was natural.  In that moment I could have
put my arms around her and drawn her to me.  I should certainly have done
so out in that world to which we belonged.  As it was, the situation
stopped there in the only way it could; but I was left alone in my little
hut, glowing warmly through and through with a pleasant satisfaction; and
I knew that a tie, or a tacit something, existed between us which had not
existed before.




CHAPTER XXXII


I awoke, oppressed by a mysterious sensation.  There seemed something
missing in my environment.  But the mystery and oppressiveness vanished
after the first few seconds of waking, when I identified the missing
something as the wind.  I had fallen asleep in that state of nerve
tension with which one meets the continuous shock of sound or movement,
and I had awakened, still tense, bracing myself to meet the pressure of
something which no longer bore upon me.

It was the first night I had spent under cover in several months, and I
lay luxuriously for some minutes under my blankets (for once not wet with
fog or spray), analysing, first, the effect produced upon me by the
cessation of the wind, and next, the joy which was mine from resting on
the mattress made by Maud’s hands.  When I had dressed and opened the
door, I heard the waves still lapping on the beach, garrulously attesting
the fury of the night.  It was a clear day, and the sun was shining.  I
had slept late, and I stepped outside with sudden energy, bent upon
making up lost time as befitted a dweller on Endeavour Island.

And when outside, I stopped short.  I believed my eyes without question,
and yet I was for the moment stunned by what they disclosed to me.
There, on the beach, not fifty feet away, bow on, dismasted, was a
black-hulled vessel.  Masts and booms, tangled with shrouds, sheets, and
rent canvas, were rubbing gently alongside.  I could have rubbed my eyes
as I looked.  There was the home-made galley we had built, the familiar
break of the poop, the low yacht-cabin scarcely rising above the rail.
It was the _Ghost_.

What freak of fortune had brought it here—here of all spots? what chance
of chances?  I looked at the bleak, inaccessible wall at my back and know
the profundity of despair.  Escape was hopeless, out of the question.  I
thought of Maud, asleep there in the hut we had reared; I remembered her
“Good-night, Humphrey”; “my woman, my mate,” went ringing through my
brain, but now, alas, it was a knell that sounded.  Then everything went
black before my eyes.

Possibly it was the fraction of a second, but I had no knowledge of how
long an interval had lapsed before I was myself again.  There lay the
_Ghost_, bow on to the beach, her splintered bowsprit projecting over the
sand, her tangled spars rubbing against her side to the lift of the
crooning waves.  Something must be done, must be done.

It came upon me suddenly, as strange, that nothing moved aboard.  Wearied
from the night of struggle and wreck, all hands were yet asleep, I
thought.  My next thought was that Maud and I might yet escape.  If we
could take to the boat and make round the point before any one awoke?  I
would call her and start.  My hand was lifted at her door to knock, when
I recollected the smallness of the island.  We could never hide ourselves
upon it.  There was nothing for us but the wide raw ocean.  I thought of
our snug little huts, our supplies of meat and oil and moss and firewood,
and I knew that we could never survive the wintry sea and the great
storms which were to come.

So I stood, with hesitant knuckle, without her door.  It was impossible,
impossible.  A wild thought of rushing in and killing her as she slept
rose in my mind.  And then, in a flash, the better solution came to me.
All hands were asleep.  Why not creep aboard the _Ghost_,—well I knew the
way to Wolf Larsen’s bunk,—and kill him in his sleep?  After that—well,
we would see.  But with him dead there was time and space in which to
prepare to do other things; and besides, whatever new situation arose, it
could not possibly be worse than the present one.

My knife was at my hip.  I returned to my hut for the shot-gun, made sure
it was loaded, and went down to the _Ghost_.  With some difficulty, and
at the expense of a wetting to the waist, I climbed aboard.  The
forecastle scuttle was open.  I paused to listen for the breathing of the
men, but there was no breathing.  I almost gasped as the thought came to
me: What if the _Ghost_ is deserted?  I listened more closely.  There was
no sound.  I cautiously descended the ladder.  The place had the empty
and musty feel and smell usual to a dwelling no longer inhabited.
Everywhere was a thick litter of discarded and ragged garments, old
sea-boots, leaky oilskins—all the worthless forecastle dunnage of a long
voyage.

Abandoned hastily, was my conclusion, as I ascended to the deck.  Hope
was alive again in my breast, and I looked about me with greater
coolness.  I noted that the boats were missing.  The steerage told the
same tale as the forecastle.  The hunters had packed their belongings
with similar haste.  The _Ghost_ was deserted.  It was Maud’s and mine.
I thought of the ship’s stores and the lazarette beneath the cabin, and
the idea came to me of surprising Maud with something nice for breakfast.

The reaction from my fear, and the knowledge that the terrible deed I had
come to do was no longer necessary, made me boyish and eager.  I went up
the steerage companion-way two steps at a time, with nothing distinct in
my mind except joy and the hope that Maud would sleep on until the
surprise breakfast was quite ready for her.  As I rounded the galley, a
new satisfaction was mine at thought of all the splendid cooking utensils
inside.  I sprang up the break of the poop, and saw—Wolf Larsen.  What of
my impetus and the stunning surprise, I clattered three or four steps
along the deck before I could stop myself.  He was standing in the
companion-way, only his head and shoulders visible, staring straight at
me.  His arms were resting on the half-open slide.  He made no movement
whatever—simply stood there, staring at me.

I began to tremble.  The old stomach sickness clutched me.  I put one
hand on the edge of the house to steady myself.  My lips seemed suddenly
dry and I moistened them against the need of speech.  Nor did I for an
instant take my eyes off him.  Neither of us spoke.  There was something
ominous in his silence, his immobility.  All my old fear of him returned
and by my new fear was increased an hundred-fold.  And still we stood, the
pair of us, staring at each other.

I was aware of the demand for action, and, my old helplessness strong
upon me, I was waiting for him to take the initiative.  Then, as the
moments went by, it came to me that the situation was analogous to the
one in which I had approached the long-maned bull, my intention of
clubbing obscured by fear until it became a desire to make him run.  So
it was at last impressed upon me that I was there, not to have Wolf
Larsen take the initiative, but to take it myself.

I cocked both barrels and levelled the shot-gun at him.  Had he moved,
attempted to drop down the companion-way, I know I would have shot him.
But he stood motionless and staring as before.  And as I faced him, with
levelled gun shaking in my hands, I had time to note the worn and haggard
appearance of his face.  It was as if some strong anxiety had wasted it.
The cheeks were sunken, and there was a wearied, puckered expression on
the brow.  And it seemed to me that his eyes were strange, not only the
expression, but the physical seeming, as though the optic nerves and
supporting muscles had suffered strain and slightly twisted the eyeballs.

All this I saw, and my brain now working rapidly, I thought a thousand
thoughts; and yet I could not pull the triggers.  I lowered the gun and
stepped to the corner of the cabin, primarily to relieve the tension on
my nerves and to make a new start, and incidentally to be closer.  Again
I raised the gun.  He was almost at arm’s length.  There was no hope for
him.  I was resolved.  There was no possible chance of missing him, no
matter how poor my marksmanship.  And yet I wrestled with myself and
could not pull the triggers.

“Well?” he demanded impatiently.

I strove vainly to force my fingers down on the triggers, and vainly I
strove to say something.

“Why don’t you shoot?” he asked.

I cleared my throat of a huskiness which prevented speech.  “Hump,” he
said slowly, “you can’t do it.  You are not exactly afraid.  You are
impotent.  Your conventional morality is stronger than you.  You are the
slave to the opinions which have credence among the people you have known
and have read about.  Their code has been drummed into your head from the
time you lisped, and in spite of your philosophy, and of what I have
taught you, it won’t let you kill an unarmed, unresisting man.”

“I know it,” I said hoarsely.

“And you know that I would kill an unarmed man as readily as I would
smoke a cigar,” he went on.  “You know me for what I am,—my worth in the
world by your standard.  You have called me snake, tiger, shark, monster,
and Caliban.  And yet, you little rag puppet, you little echoing
mechanism, you are unable to kill me as you would a snake or a shark,
because I have hands, feet, and a body shaped somewhat like yours.  Bah!
I had hoped better things of you, Hump.”

He stepped out of the companion-way and came up to me.

“Put down that gun.  I want to ask you some questions.  I haven’t had a
chance to look around yet.  What place is this?  How is the _Ghost_
lying?  How did you get wet?  Where’s Maud?—I beg your pardon, Miss
Brewster—or should I say, ‘Mrs. Van Weyden’?”

I had backed away from him, almost weeping at my inability to shoot him,
but not fool enough to put down the gun.  I hoped, desperately, that he
might commit some hostile act, attempt to strike me or choke me; for in
such way only I knew I could be stirred to shoot.

“This is Endeavour Island,” I said.

“Never heard of it,” he broke in.

“At least, that’s our name for it,” I amended.

“Our?” he queried.  “Who’s our?”

“Miss Brewster and myself.  And the _Ghost_ is lying, as you can see for
yourself, bow on to the beach.”

“There are seals here,” he said.  “They woke me up with their barking, or
I’d be sleeping yet.  I heard them when I drove in last night.  They were
the first warning that I was on a lee shore.  It’s a rookery, the kind of
a thing I’ve hunted for years.  Thanks to my brother Death, I’ve lighted
on a fortune.  It’s a mint.  What’s its bearings?”

“Haven’t the least idea,” I said.  “But you ought to know quite closely.
What were your last observations?”

He smiled inscrutably, but did not answer.

“Well, where’s all hands?” I asked.  “How does it come that you are
alone?”

I was prepared for him again to set aside my question, and was surprised
at the readiness of his reply.

“My brother got me inside forty-eight hours, and through no fault of
mine.  Boarded me in the night with only the watch on deck.  Hunters went
back on me.  He gave them a bigger lay.  Heard him offering it.  Did it
right before me.  Of course the crew gave me the go-by.  That was to be
expected.  All hands went over the side, and there I was, marooned on my
own vessel.  It was Death’s turn, and it’s all in the family anyway.”

“But how did you lose the masts?” I asked.

“Walk over and examine those lanyards,” he said, pointing to where the
mizzen-rigging should have been.

“They have been cut with a knife!” I exclaimed.

“Not quite,” he laughed.  “It was a neater job.  Look again.”

I looked.  The lanyards had been almost severed, with just enough left to
hold the shrouds till some severe strain should be put upon them.

“Cooky did that,” he laughed again.  “I know, though I didn’t spot him at
it.  Kind of evened up the score a bit.”

“Good for Mugridge!” I cried.

“Yes, that’s what I thought when everything went over the side.  Only I
said it on the other side of my mouth.”

“But what were you doing while all this was going on?” I asked.

“My best, you may be sure, which wasn’t much under the circumstances.”

I turned to re-examine Thomas Mugridge’s work.

“I guess I’ll sit down and take the sunshine,” I heard Wolf Larsen
saying.

There was a hint, just a slight hint, of physical feebleness in his
voice, and it was so strange that I looked quickly at him.  His hand was
sweeping nervously across his face, as though he were brushing away
cobwebs.  I was puzzled.  The whole thing was so unlike the Wolf Larsen I
had known.

“How are your headaches?” I asked.

“They still trouble me,” was his answer.  “I think I have one coming on
now.”

He slipped down from his sitting posture till he lay on the deck.  Then
he rolled over on his side, his head resting on the biceps of the under
arm, the forearm shielding his eyes from the sun.  I stood regarding him
wonderingly.

“Now’s your chance, Hump,” he said.

“I don’t understand,” I lied, for I thoroughly understood.

“Oh, nothing,” he added softly, as if he were drowsing; “only you’ve got
me where you want me.”

“No, I haven’t,” I retorted; “for I want you a few thousand miles away
from here.”

He chuckled, and thereafter spoke no more.  He did not stir as I passed
by him and went down into the cabin.  I lifted the trap in the floor, but
for some moments gazed dubiously into the darkness of the lazarette
beneath.  I hesitated to descend.  What if his lying down were a ruse?
Pretty, indeed, to be caught there like a rat.  I crept softly up the
companion-way and peeped at him.  He was lying as I had left him.  Again
I went below; but before I dropped into the lazarette I took the
precaution of casting down the door in advance.  At least there would be
no lid to the trap.  But it was all needless.  I regained the cabin with
a store of jams, sea-biscuits, canned meats, and such things,—all I could
carry,—and replaced the trap-door.

A peep at Wolf Larsen showed me that he had not moved.  A bright thought
struck me.  I stole into his state-room and possessed myself of his
revolvers.  There were no other weapons, though I thoroughly ransacked
the three remaining state-rooms.  To make sure, I returned and went
through the steerage and forecastle, and in the galley gathered up all
the sharp meat and vegetable knives.  Then I bethought me of the great
yachtsman’s knife he always carried, and I came to him and spoke to him,
first softly, then loudly.  He did not move.  I bent over and took it
from his pocket.  I breathed more freely.  He had no arms with which to
attack me from a distance; while I, armed, could always forestall him
should he attempt to grapple me with his terrible gorilla arms.

Filling a coffee-pot and frying-pan with part of my plunder, and taking
some chinaware from the cabin pantry, I left Wolf Larsen lying in the sun
and went ashore.

Maud was still asleep.  I blew up the embers (we had not yet arranged a
winter kitchen), and quite feverishly cooked the breakfast.  Toward the
end, I heard her moving about within the hut, making her toilet.  Just as
all was ready and the coffee poured, the door opened and she came forth.

“It’s not fair of you,” was her greeting.  “You are usurping one of my
prerogatives.  You know you I agreed that the cooking should be mine,
and—”

“But just this once,” I pleaded.

“If you promise not to do it again,” she smiled.  “Unless, of course, you
have grown tired of my poor efforts.”

To my delight she never once looked toward the beach, and I maintained
the banter with such success all unconsciously she sipped coffee from the
china cup, ate fried evaporated potatoes, and spread marmalade on her
biscuit.  But it could not last.  I saw the surprise that came over her.
She had discovered the china plate from which she was eating.  She looked
over the breakfast, noting detail after detail.  Then she looked at me,
and her face turned slowly toward the beach.

“Humphrey!” she said.

The old unnamable terror mounted into her eyes.

“Is—he?” she quavered.

I nodded my head.




CHAPTER XXXIII


We waited all day for Wolf Larsen to come ashore.  It was an intolerable
period of anxiety.  Each moment one or the other of us cast expectant
glances toward the _Ghost_.  But he did not come.  He did not even appear
on deck.

“Perhaps it is his headache,” I said.  “I left him lying on the poop.  He
may lie there all night.  I think I’ll go and see.”

Maud looked entreaty at me.

“It is all right,” I assured her.  “I shall take the revolvers.  You know
I collected every weapon on board.”

“But there are his arms, his hands, his terrible, terrible hands!” she
objected.  And then she cried, “Oh, Humphrey, I am afraid of him!  Don’t
go—please don’t go!”

She rested her hand appealingly on mine, and sent my pulse fluttering.
My heart was surely in my eyes for a moment.  The dear and lovely woman!
And she was so much the woman, clinging and appealing, sunshine and dew
to my manhood, rooting it deeper and sending through it the sap of a new
strength.  I was for putting my arm around her, as when in the midst of
the seal herd; but I considered, and refrained.

“I shall not take any risks,” I said.  “I’ll merely peep over the bow and
see.”

She pressed my hand earnestly and let me go.  But the space on deck where
I had left him lying was vacant.  He had evidently gone below.  That
night we stood alternate watches, one of us sleeping at a time; for there
was no telling what Wolf Larsen might do.  He was certainly capable of
anything.

The next day we waited, and the next, and still he made no sign.

“These headaches of his, these attacks,” Maud said, on the afternoon of
the fourth day; “Perhaps he is ill, very ill.  He may be dead.”

“Or dying,” was her afterthought when she had waited some time for me to
speak.

“Better so,” I answered.

“But think, Humphrey, a fellow-creature in his last lonely hour.”

“Perhaps,” I suggested.

“Yes, even perhaps,” she acknowledged.  “But we do not know.  It would be
terrible if he were.  I could never forgive myself.  We must do
something.”

“Perhaps,” I suggested again.

I waited, smiling inwardly at the woman of her which compelled a
solicitude for Wolf Larsen, of all creatures.  Where was her solicitude
for me, I thought,—for me whom she had been afraid to have merely peep
aboard?

She was too subtle not to follow the trend of my silence.  And she was as
direct as she was subtle.

“You must go aboard, Humphrey, and find out,” she said.  “And if you want
to laugh at me, you have my consent and forgiveness.”

I arose obediently and went down the beach.

“Do be careful,” she called after me.

I waved my arm from the forecastle head and dropped down to the deck.
Aft I walked to the cabin companion, where I contented myself with
hailing below.  Wolf Larsen answered, and as he started to ascend the
stairs I cocked my revolver.  I displayed it openly during our
conversation, but he took no notice of it.  He appeared the same,
physically, as when last I saw him, but he was gloomy and silent.  In
fact, the few words we spoke could hardly be called a conversation.  I
did not inquire why he had not been ashore, nor did he ask why I had not
come aboard.  His head was all right again, he said, and so, without
further parley, I left him.

Maud received my report with obvious relief, and the sight of smoke which
later rose in the galley put her in a more cheerful mood.  The next day,
and the next, we saw the galley smoke rising, and sometimes we caught
glimpses of him on the poop.  But that was all.  He made no attempt to
come ashore.  This we knew, for we still maintained our night-watches.
We were waiting for him to do something, to show his hand, so to say, and
his inaction puzzled and worried us.

A week of this passed by.  We had no other interest than Wolf Larsen, and
his presence weighed us down with an apprehension which prevented us from
doing any of the little things we had planned.

But at the end of the week the smoke ceased rising from the galley, and
he no longer showed himself on the poop.  I could see Maud’s solicitude
again growing, though she timidly—and even proudly, I think—forbore a
repetition of her request.  After all, what censure could be put upon
her?  She was divinely altruistic, and she was a woman.  Besides, I was
myself aware of hurt at thought of this man whom I had tried to kill,
dying alone with his fellow-creatures so near.  He was right.  The code
of my group was stronger than I.  The fact that he had hands, feet, and a
body shaped somewhat like mine, constituted a claim which I could not
ignore.

So I did not wait a second time for Maud to send me.  I discovered that
we stood in need of condensed milk and marmalade, and announced that I
was going aboard.  I could see that she wavered.  She even went so far as
to murmur that they were non-essentials and that my trip after them might
be inexpedient.  And as she had followed the trend of my silence, she now
followed the trend of my speech, and she knew that I was going aboard,
not because of condensed milk and marmalade, but because of her and of
her anxiety, which she knew she had failed to hide.

I took off my shoes when I gained the forecastle head, and went
noiselessly aft in my stocking feet.  Nor did I call this time from the
top of the companion-way.  Cautiously descending, I found the cabin
deserted.  The door to his state-room was closed.  At first I thought of
knocking, then I remembered my ostensible errand and resolved to carry it
out.  Carefully avoiding noise, I lifted the trap-door in the floor and
set it to one side.  The slop-chest, as well as the provisions, was
stored in the lazarette, and I took advantage of the opportunity to lay
in a stock of underclothing.

As I emerged from the lazarette I heard sounds in Wolf Larsen’s
state-room.  I crouched and listened.  The door-knob rattled.  Furtively,
instinctively, I slunk back behind the table and drew and cocked my
revolver.  The door swung open and he came forth.  Never had I seen so
profound a despair as that which I saw on his face,—the face of Wolf
Larsen the fighter, the strong man, the indomitable one.  For all the
world like a woman wringing her hands, he raised his clenched fists and
groaned.  One fist unclosed, and the open palm swept across his eyes as
though brushing away cobwebs.

“God!  God!” he groaned, and the clenched fists were raised again to the
infinite despair with which his throat vibrated.

It was horrible.  I was trembling all over, and I could feel the shivers
running up and down my spine and the sweat standing out on my forehead.
Surely there can be little in this world more awful than the spectacle of
a strong man in the moment when he is utterly weak and broken.

But Wolf Larsen regained control of himself by an exertion of his
remarkable will.  And it was exertion.  His whole frame shook with the
struggle.  He resembled a man on the verge of a fit.  His face strove to
compose itself, writhing and twisting in the effort till he broke down
again.  Once more the clenched fists went upward and he groaned.  He
caught his breath once or twice and sobbed.  Then he was successful.  I
could have thought him the old Wolf Larsen, and yet there was in his
movements a vague suggestion of weakness and indecision.  He started for
the companion-way, and stepped forward quite as I had been accustomed to
see him do; and yet again, in his very walk, there seemed that suggestion
of weakness and indecision.

I was now concerned with fear for myself.  The open trap lay directly in
his path, and his discovery of it would lead instantly to his discovery
of me.  I was angry with myself for being caught in so cowardly a
position, crouching on the floor.  There was yet time.  I rose swiftly to
my feet, and, I know, quite unconsciously assumed a defiant attitude.  He
took no notice of me.  Nor did he notice the open trap.  Before I could
grasp the situation, or act, he had walked right into the trap.  One foot
was descending into the opening, while the other foot was just on the
verge of beginning the uplift.  But when the descending foot missed the
solid flooring and felt vacancy beneath, it was the old Wolf Larsen and
the tiger muscles that made the falling body spring across the opening,
even as it fell, so that he struck on his chest and stomach, with arms
outstretched, on the floor of the opposite side.  The next instant he had
drawn up his legs and rolled clear.  But he rolled into my marmalade and
underclothes and against the trap-door.

The expression on his face was one of complete comprehension.  But before
I could guess what he had comprehended, he had dropped the trap-door into
place, closing the lazarette.  Then I understood.  He thought he had me
inside.  Also, he was blind, blind as a bat.  I watched him, breathing
carefully so that he should not hear me.  He stepped quickly to his
state-room.  I saw his hand miss the door-knob by an inch, quickly fumble
for it, and find it.  This was my chance.  I tiptoed across the cabin and
to the top of the stairs.  He came back, dragging a heavy sea-chest,
which he deposited on top of the trap.  Not content with this he fetched
a second chest and placed it on top of the first.  Then he gathered up
the marmalade and underclothes and put them on the table.  When he
started up the companion-way, I retreated, silently rolling over on top
of the cabin.

He shoved the slide part way back and rested his arms on it, his body
still in the companion-way.  His attitude was of one looking forward the
length of the schooner, or staring, rather, for his eyes were fixed and
unblinking.  I was only five feet away and directly in what should have
been his line of vision.  It was uncanny.  I felt myself a ghost, what of
my invisibility.  I waved my hand back and forth, of course without
effect; but when the moving shadow fell across his face I saw at once
that he was susceptible to the impression.  His face became more
expectant and tense as he tried to analyze and identify the impression.
He knew that he had responded to something from without, that his
sensibility had been touched by a changing something in his environment;
but what it was he could not discover.  I ceased waving my hand, so that
the shadow remained stationary.  He slowly moved his head back and forth
under it and turned from side to side, now in the sunshine, now in the
shade, feeling the shadow, as it were, testing it by sensation.

I, too, was busy, trying to reason out how he was aware of the existence
of so intangible a thing as a shadow.  If it were his eyeballs only that
were affected, or if his optic nerve were not wholly destroyed, the
explanation was simple.  If otherwise, then the only conclusion I could
reach was that the sensitive skin recognized the difference of
temperature between shade and sunshine.  Or, perhaps,—who can tell?—it
was that fabled sixth sense which conveyed to him the loom and feel of an
object close at hand.

Giving over his attempt to determine the shadow, he stepped on deck and
started forward, walking with a swiftness and confidence which surprised
me.  And still there was that hint of the feebleness of the blind in his
walk.  I knew it now for what it was.

To my amused chagrin, he discovered my shoes on the forecastle head and
brought them back with him into the galley.  I watched him build the fire
and set about cooking food for himself; then I stole into the cabin for
my marmalade and underclothes, slipped back past the galley, and climbed
down to the beach to deliver my barefoot report.




CHAPTER XXXIV


“It’s too bad the _Ghost_ has lost her masts.  Why we could sail away in
her.  Don’t you think we could, Humphrey?”

I sprang excitedly to my feet.

“I wonder, I wonder,” I repeated, pacing up and down.

Maud’s eyes were shining with anticipation as they followed me.  She had
such faith in me!  And the thought of it was so much added power.  I
remembered Michelet’s “To man, woman is as the earth was to her legendary
son; he has but to fall down and kiss her breast and he is strong again.”
For the first time I knew the wonderful truth of his words.  Why, I was
living them.  Maud was all this to me, an unfailing, source of strength
and courage.  I had but to look at her, or think of her, and be strong
again.

“It can be done, it can be done,” I was thinking and asserting aloud.
“What men have done, I can do; and if they have never done this before,
still I can do it.”

“What? for goodness’ sake,” Maud demanded.  “Do be merciful.  What is it
you can do?”

“We can do it,” I amended.  “Why, nothing else than put the masts back
into the _Ghost_ and sail away.”

“Humphrey!” she exclaimed.

And I felt as proud of my conception as if it were already a fact
accomplished.

“But how is it possible to be done?” she asked.

“I don’t know,” was my answer.  “I know only that I am capable of doing
anything these days.”

I smiled proudly at her—too proudly, for she dropped her eyes and was for
the moment silent.

“But there is Captain Larsen,” she objected.

“Blind and helpless,” I answered promptly, waving him aside as a straw.

“But those terrible hands of his!  You know how he leaped across the
opening of the lazarette.”

“And you know also how I crept about and avoided him,” I contended gaily.

“And lost your shoes.”

“You’d hardly expect them to avoid Wolf Larsen without my feet inside of
them.”

We both laughed, and then went seriously to work constructing the plan
whereby we were to step the masts of the _Ghost_ and return to the world.
I remembered hazily the physics of my school days, while the last few
months had given me practical experience with mechanical purchases.  I
must say, though, when we walked down to the _Ghost_ to inspect more
closely the task before us, that the sight of the great masts lying in
the water almost disheartened me.  Where were we to begin?  If there had
been one mast standing, something high up to which to fasten blocks and
tackles!  But there was nothing.  It reminded me of the problem of
lifting oneself by one’s boot-straps.  I understood the mechanics of
levers; but where was I to get a fulcrum?

There was the mainmast, fifteen inches in diameter at what was now the
butt, still sixty-five feet in length, and weighing, I roughly
calculated, at least three thousand pounds.  And then came the foremast,
larger in diameter, and weighing surely thirty-five hundred pounds.
Where was I to begin?  Maud stood silently by my side, while I evolved in
my mind the contrivance known among sailors as “shears.”  But, though
known to sailors, I invented it there on Endeavour Island.  By crossing
and lashing the ends of two spars, and then elevating them in the air
like an inverted “V,” I could get a point above the deck to which to make
fast my hoisting tackle.  To this hoisting tackle I could, if necessary,
attach a second hoisting tackle.  And then there was the windlass!

Maud saw that I had achieved a solution, and her eyes warmed
sympathetically.

“What are you going to do?” she asked.

“Clear that raffle,” I answered, pointing to the tangled wreckage
overside.

Ah, the decisiveness, the very sound of the words, was good in my ears.
“Clear that raffle!”  Imagine so salty a phrase on the lips of the
Humphrey Van Weyden of a few months gone!

There must have been a touch of the melodramatic in my pose and voice,
for Maud smiled.  Her appreciation of the ridiculous was keen, and in all
things she unerringly saw and felt, where it existed, the touch of sham,
the overshading, the overtone.  It was this which had given poise and
penetration to her own work and made her of worth to the world.  The
serious critic, with the sense of humour and the power of expression,
must inevitably command the world’s ear.  And so it was that she had
commanded.  Her sense of humour was really the artist’s instinct for
proportion.

“I’m sure I’ve heard it before, somewhere, in books,” she murmured
gleefully.

I had an instinct for proportion myself, and I collapsed forthwith,
descending from the dominant pose of a master of matter to a state of
humble confusion which was, to say the least, very miserable.

Her hand leapt out at once to mine.

“I’m so sorry,” she said.

“No need to be,” I gulped.  “It does me good.  There’s too much of the
schoolboy in me.  All of which is neither here nor there.  What we’ve got
to do is actually and literally to clear that raffle.  If you’ll come
with me in the boat, we’ll get to work and straighten things out.”

“‘When the topmen clear the raffle with their clasp-knives in their
teeth,’” she quoted at me; and for the rest of the afternoon we made
merry over our labour.

Her task was to hold the boat in position while I worked at the tangle.
And such a tangle—halyards, sheets, guys, down-hauls, shrouds, stays, all
washed about and back and forth and through, and twined and knotted by
the sea.  I cut no more than was necessary, and what with passing the
long ropes under and around the booms and masts, of unreeving the
halyards and sheets, of coiling down in the boat and uncoiling in order
to pass through another knot in the bight, I was soon wet to the skin.

The sails did require some cutting, and the canvas, heavy with water,
tried my strength severely; but I succeeded before nightfall in getting
it all spread out on the beach to dry.  We were both very tired when we
knocked off for supper, and we had done good work, too, though to the eye
it appeared insignificant.

Next morning, with Maud as able assistant, I went into the hold of the
_Ghost_ to clear the steps of the mast-butts.  We had no more than begun
work when the sound of my knocking and hammering brought Wolf Larsen.

“Hello below!” he cried down the open hatch.

The sound of his voice made Maud quickly draw close to me, as for
protection, and she rested one hand on my arm while we parleyed.

“Hello on deck,” I replied.  “Good-morning to you.”

“What are you doing down there?” he demanded.  “Trying to scuttle my ship
for me?”

“Quite the opposite; I’m repairing her,” was my answer.

“But what in thunder are you repairing?”  There was puzzlement in his
voice.

“Why, I’m getting everything ready for re-stepping the masts,” I replied
easily, as though it were the simplest project imaginable.

“It seems as though you’re standing on your own legs at last, Hump,” we
heard him say; and then for some time he was silent.

“But I say, Hump,” he called down.  “You can’t do it.”

“Oh, yes, I can,” I retorted.  “I’m doing it now.”

“But this is my vessel, my particular property.  What if I forbid you?”

“You forget,” I replied.  “You are no longer the biggest bit of the
ferment.  You were, once, and able to eat me, as you were pleased to
phrase it; but there has been a diminishing, and I am now able to eat
you.  The yeast has grown stale.”

He gave a short, disagreeable laugh.  “I see you’re working my philosophy
back on me for all it is worth.  But don’t make the mistake of
under-estimating me.  For your own good I warn you.”

“Since when have you become a philanthropist?” I queried.  “Confess, now,
in warning me for my own good, that you are very consistent.”

He ignored my sarcasm, saying, “Suppose I clap the hatch on, now?  You
won’t fool me as you did in the lazarette.”

“Wolf Larsen,” I said sternly, for the first time addressing him by this
his most familiar name, “I am unable to shoot a helpless, unresisting
man.  You have proved that to my satisfaction as well as yours.  But I
warn you now, and not so much for your own good as for mine, that I shall
shoot you the moment you attempt a hostile act.  I can shoot you now, as
I stand here; and if you are so minded, just go ahead and try to clap on
the hatch.”

“Nevertheless, I forbid you, I distinctly forbid your tampering with my
ship.”

“But, man!” I expostulated, “you advance the fact that it is your ship as
though it were a moral right.  You have never considered moral rights in
your dealings with others.  You surely do not dream that I’ll consider
them in dealing with you?”

I had stepped underneath the open hatchway so that I could see him.  The
lack of expression on his face, so different from when I had watched him
unseen, was enhanced by the unblinking, staring eyes.  It was not a
pleasant face to look upon.

“And none so poor, not even Hump, to do him reverence,” he sneered.

The sneer was wholly in his voice.  His face remained expressionless as
ever.

“How do you do, Miss Brewster,” he said suddenly, after a pause.

I started.  She had made no noise whatever, had not even moved.  Could it
be that some glimmer of vision remained to him? or that his vision was
coming back?

“How do you do, Captain Larsen,” she answered.  “Pray, how did you know I
was here?”

“Heard you breathing, of course.  I say, Hump’s improving, don’t you
think so?”

“I don’t know,” she answered, smiling at me.  “I have never seen him
otherwise.”

“You should have seen him before, then.”

“Wolf Larsen, in large doses,” I murmured, “before and after taking.”

“I want to tell you again, Hump,” he said threateningly, “that you’d
better leave things alone.”

“But don’t you care to escape as well as we?” I asked incredulously.

“No,” was his answer.  “I intend dying here.”

“Well, we don’t,” I concluded defiantly, beginning again my knocking and
hammering.




CHAPTER XXXV


Next day, the mast-steps clear and everything in readiness, we started to
get the two topmasts aboard.  The maintopmast was over thirty feet in
length, the foretopmast nearly thirty, and it was of these that I
intended making the shears.  It was puzzling work.  Fastening one end of
a heavy tackle to the windlass, and with the other end fast to the butt
of the foretopmast, I began to heave.  Maud held the turn on the windlass
and coiled down the slack.

We were astonished at the ease with which the spar was lifted.  It was an
improved crank windlass, and the purchase it gave was enormous.  Of
course, what it gave us in power we paid for in distance; as many times
as it doubled my strength, that many times was doubled the length of rope
I heaved in.  The tackle dragged heavily across the rail, increasing its
drag as the spar arose more and more out of the water, and the exertion
on the windlass grew severe.

But when the butt of the topmast was level with the rail, everything came
to a standstill.

“I might have known it,” I said impatiently.  “Now we have to do it all
over again.”

“Why not fasten the tackle part way down the mast?” Maud suggested.

“It’s what I should have done at first,” I answered, hugely disgusted
with myself.

Slipping off a turn, I lowered the mast back into the water and fastened
the tackle a third of the way down from the butt.  In an hour, what of
this and of rests between the heaving, I had hoisted it to the point
where I could hoist no more.  Eight feet of the butt was above the rail,
and I was as far away as ever from getting the spar on board.  I sat down
and pondered the problem.  It did not take long.  I sprang jubilantly to
my feet.

“Now I have it!” I cried.  “I ought to make the tackle fast at the point
of balance.  And what we learn of this will serve us with everything else
we have to hoist aboard.”

Once again I undid all my work by lowering the mast into the water.  But
I miscalculated the point of balance, so that when I heaved the top of
the mast came up instead of the butt.  Maud looked despair, but I laughed
and said it would do just as well.

Instructing her how to hold the turn and be ready to slack away at
command, I laid hold of the mast with my hands and tried to balance it
inboard across the rail.  When I thought I had it I cried to her to slack
away; but the spar righted, despite my efforts, and dropped back toward
the water.  Again I heaved it up to its old position, for I had now
another idea.  I remembered the watch-tackle—a small double and single
block affair—and fetched it.

While I was rigging it between the top of the spar and the opposite rail,
Wolf Larsen came on the scene.  We exchanged nothing more than
good-mornings, and, though he could not see, he sat on the rail out of
the way and followed by the sound all that I did.

Again instructing Maud to slack away at the windlass when I gave the
word, I proceeded to heave on the watch-tackle.  Slowly the mast swung in
until it balanced at right angles across the rail; and then I discovered
to my amazement that there was no need for Maud to slack away.  In fact,
the very opposite was necessary.  Making the watch-tackle fast, I hove on
the windlass and brought in the mast, inch by inch, till its top tilted
down to the deck and finally its whole length lay on the deck.

I looked at my watch.  It was twelve o’clock.  My back was aching sorely,
and I felt extremely tired and hungry.  And there on the deck was a
single stick of timber to show for a whole morning’s work.  For the first
time I thoroughly realized the extent of the task before us.  But I was
learning, I was learning.  The afternoon would show far more
accomplished.  And it did; for we returned at one o’clock, rested and
strengthened by a hearty dinner.

In less than an hour I had the maintopmast on deck and was constructing
the shears.  Lashing the two topmasts together, and making allowance for
their unequal length, at the point of intersection I attached the double
block of the main throat-halyards.  This, with the single block and the
throat-halyards themselves, gave me a hoisting tackle.  To prevent the
butts of the masts from slipping on the deck, I nailed down thick cleats.
Everything in readiness, I made a line fast to the apex of the shears and
carried it directly to the windlass.  I was growing to have faith in that
windlass, for it gave me power beyond all expectation.  As usual, Maud
held the turn while I heaved.  The shears rose in the air.

Then I discovered I had forgotten guy-ropes.  This necessitated my
climbing the shears, which I did twice, before I finished guying it fore
and aft and to either side.  Twilight had set in by the time this was
accomplished.  Wolf Larsen, who had sat about and listened all afternoon
and never opened his mouth, had taken himself off to the galley and
started his supper.  I felt quite stiff across the small of the back, so
much so that I straightened up with an effort and with pain.  I looked
proudly at my work.  It was beginning to show.  I was wild with desire,
like a child with a new toy, to hoist something with my shears.

“I wish it weren’t so late,” I said.  “I’d like to see how it works.”

“Don’t be a glutton, Humphrey,” Maud chided me.  “Remember, to-morrow is
coming, and you’re so tired now that you can hardly stand.”

“And you?” I said, with sudden solicitude.  “You must be very tired.  You
have worked hard and nobly.  I am proud of you, Maud.”

“Not half so proud as I am of you, nor with half the reason,” she
answered, looking me straight in the eyes for a moment with an expression
in her own and a dancing, tremulous light which I had not seen before and
which gave me a pang of quick delight, I know not why, for I did not
understand it.  Then she dropped her eyes, to lift them again, laughing.

“If our friends could see us now,” she said.  “Look at us.  Have you ever
paused for a moment to consider our appearance?”

“Yes, I have considered yours, frequently,” I answered, puzzling over
what I had seen in her eyes and puzzled by her sudden change of subject.

“Mercy!” she cried.  “And what do I look like, pray?”

“A scarecrow, I’m afraid,” I replied.  “Just glance at your draggled
skirts, for instance.  Look at those three-cornered tears.  And such a
waist!  It would not require a Sherlock Holmes to deduce that you have
been cooking over a camp-fire, to say nothing of trying out seal-blubber.
And to cap it all, that cap!  And all that is the woman who wrote ‘A Kiss
Endured.’”

She made me an elaborate and stately courtesy, and said, “As for you,
sir—”

And yet, through the five minutes of banter which followed, there was a
serious something underneath the fun which I could not but relate to the
strange and fleeting expression I had caught in her eyes.  What was it?
Could it be that our eyes were speaking beyond the will of our speech?
My eyes had spoken, I knew, until I had found the culprits out and
silenced them.  This had occurred several times.  But had she seen the
clamour in them and understood?  And had her eyes so spoken to me?  What
else could that expression have meant—that dancing, tremulous light, and
a something more which words could not describe.  And yet it could not
be.  It was impossible.  Besides, I was not skilled in the speech of
eyes.  I was only Humphrey Van Weyden, a bookish fellow who loved.  And
to love, and to wait and win love, that surely was glorious enough for
me.  And thus I thought, even as we chaffed each other’s appearance,
until we arrived ashore and there were other things to think about.

“It’s a shame, after working hard all day, that we cannot have an
uninterrupted night’s sleep,” I complained, after supper.

“But there can be no danger now? from a blind man?” she queried.

“I shall never be able to trust him,” I averred, “and far less now that
he is blind.  The liability is that his part helplessness will make him
more malignant than ever.  I know what I shall do to-morrow, the first
thing—run out a light anchor and kedge the schooner off the beach.  And
each night when we come ashore in the boat, Mr. Wolf Larsen will be left
a prisoner on board.  So this will be the last night we have to stand
watch, and because of that it will go the easier.”

We were awake early and just finishing breakfast as daylight came.

“Oh, Humphrey!” I heard Maud cry in dismay and suddenly stop.

I looked at her.  She was gazing at the _Ghost_.  I followed her gaze,
but could see nothing unusual.  She looked at me, and I looked inquiry
back.

“The shears,” she said, and her voice trembled.

I had forgotten their existence.  I looked again, but could not see them.

“If he has—” I muttered savagely.

She put her hand sympathetically on mine, and said, “You will have to
begin over again.”

“Oh, believe me, my anger means nothing; I could not hurt a fly,” I
smiled back bitterly.  “And the worst of it is, he knows it.  You are
right.  If he has destroyed the shears, I shall do nothing except begin
over again.”

“But I’ll stand my watch on board hereafter,” I blurted out a moment
later.  “And if he interferes—”

“But I dare not stay ashore all night alone,” Maud was saying when I came
back to myself.  “It would be so much nicer if he would be friendly with
us and help us.  We could all live comfortably aboard.”

“We will,” I asserted, still savagely, for the destruction of my beloved
shears had hit me hard.  “That is, you and I will live aboard, friendly
or not with Wolf Larsen.”

“It’s childish,” I laughed later, “for him to do such things, and for me
to grow angry over them, for that matter.”

But my heart smote me when we climbed aboard and looked at the havoc he
had done.  The shears were gone altogether.  The guys had been slashed
right and left.  The throat-halyards which I had rigged were cut across
through every part.  And he knew I could not splice.  A thought struck
me.  I ran to the windlass.  It would not work.  He had broken it.  We
looked at each other in consternation.  Then I ran to the side.  The
masts, booms, and gaffs I had cleared were gone.  He had found the lines
which held them, and cast them adrift.

Tears were in Maud’s eyes, and I do believe they were for me.  I could
have wept myself.  Where now was our project of remasting the _Ghost_?
He had done his work well.  I sat down on the hatch-combing and rested my
chin on my hands in black despair.

“He deserves to die,” I cried out; “and God forgive me, I am not man
enough to be his executioner.”

But Maud was by my side, passing her hand soothingly through my hair as
though I were a child, and saying, “There, there; it will all come right.
We are in the right, and it must come right.”

I remembered Michelet and leaned my head against her; and truly I became
strong again.  The blessed woman was an unfailing fount of power to me.
What did it matter?  Only a set-back, a delay.  The tide could not have
carried the masts far to seaward, and there had been no wind.  It meant
merely more work to find them and tow them back.  And besides, it was a
lesson.  I knew what to expect.  He might have waited and destroyed our
work more effectually when we had more accomplished.

“Here he comes now,” she whispered.

I glanced up.  He was strolling leisurely along the poop on the port
side.

“Take no notice of him,” I whispered.  “He’s coming to see how we take
it.  Don’t let him know that we know.  We can deny him that satisfaction.
Take off your shoes—that’s right—and carry them in your hand.”

And then we played hide-and-seek with the blind man.  As he came up the
port side we slipped past on the starboard; and from the poop we watched
him turn and start aft on our track.

He must have known, somehow, that we were on board, for he said
“Good-morning” very confidently, and waited, for the greeting to be
returned.  Then he strolled aft, and we slipped forward.

“Oh, I know you’re aboard,” he called out, and I could see him listen
intently after he had spoken.

It reminded me of the great hoot-owl, listening, after its booming cry,
for the stir of its frightened prey.  But we did not stir, and we moved
only when he moved.  And so we dodged about the deck, hand in hand, like
a couple of children chased by a wicked ogre, till Wolf Larsen, evidently
in disgust, left the deck for the cabin.  There was glee in our eyes, and
suppressed titters in our mouths, as we put on our shoes and clambered
over the side into the boat.  And as I looked into Maud’s clear brown
eyes I forgot the evil he had done, and I knew only that I loved her, and
that because of her the strength was mine to win our way back to the
world.




CHAPTER XXXVI


For two days Maud and I ranged the sea and explored the beaches in search
of the missing masts.  But it was not till the third day that we found
them, all of them, the shears included, and, of all perilous places, in
the pounding surf of the grim south-western promontory.  And how we
worked!  At the dark end of the first day we returned, exhausted, to our
little cove, towing the mainmast behind us.  And we had been compelled to
row, in a dead calm, practically every inch of the way.

Another day of heart-breaking and dangerous toil saw us in camp with the
two topmasts to the good.  The day following I was desperate, and I
rafted together the foremast, the fore and main booms, and the fore and
main gaffs.  The wind was favourable, and I had thought to tow them back
under sail, but the wind baffled, then died away, and our progress with
the oars was a snail’s pace.  And it was such dispiriting effort.  To
throw one’s whole strength and weight on the oars and to feel the boat
checked in its forward lunge by the heavy drag behind, was not exactly
exhilarating.

Night began to fall, and to make matters worse, the wind sprang up ahead.
Not only did all forward motion cease, but we began to drift back and out
to sea.  I struggled at the oars till I was played out.  Poor Maud, whom
I could never prevent from working to the limit of her strength, lay
weakly back in the stern-sheets.  I could row no more.  My bruised and
swollen hands could no longer close on the oar handles.  My wrists and
arms ached intolerably, and though I had eaten heartily of a
twelve-o’clock lunch, I had worked so hard that I was faint from hunger.

I pulled in the oars and bent forward to the line which held the tow.
But Maud’s hand leaped out restrainingly to mine.

“What are you going to do?” she asked in a strained, tense voice.

“Cast it off,” I answered, slipping a turn of the rope.

But her fingers closed on mine.

“Please don’t,” she begged.

“It is useless,” I answered.  “Here is night and the wind blowing us off
the land.”

“But think, Humphrey.  If we cannot sail away on the _Ghost_, we may
remain for years on the island—for life even.  If it has never been
discovered all these years, it may never be discovered.”

“You forget the boat we found on the beach,” I reminded her.

“It was a seal-hunting boat,” she replied, “and you know perfectly well
that if the men had escaped they would have been back to make their
fortunes from the rookery.  You know they never escaped.”

I remained silent, undecided.

“Besides,” she added haltingly, “it’s your idea, and I want to see you
succeed.”

Now I could harden my heart.  As soon as she put it on a flattering
personal basis, generosity compelled me to deny her.

“Better years on the island than to die to-night, or to-morrow, or the
next day, in the open boat.  We are not prepared to brave the sea.  We
have no food, no water, no blankets, nothing.  Why, you’d not survive the
night without blankets: I know how strong you are.  You are shivering
now.”

“It is only nervousness,” she answered.  “I am afraid you will cast off
the masts in spite of me.”

“Oh, please, please, Humphrey, don’t!” she burst out, a moment later.

And so it ended, with the phrase she knew had all power over me.  We
shivered miserably throughout the night.  Now and again I fitfully slept,
but the pain of the cold always aroused me.  How Maud could stand it was
beyond me.  I was too tired to thrash my arms about and warm myself, but
I found strength time and again to chafe her hands and feet to restore
the circulation.  And still she pleaded with me not to cast off the
masts.  About three in the morning she was caught by a cold cramp, and
after I had rubbed her out of that she became quite numb.  I was
frightened.  I got out the oars and made her row, though she was so weak
I thought she would faint at every stroke.

Morning broke, and we looked long in the growing light for our island.
At last it showed, small and black, on the horizon, fully fifteen miles
away.  I scanned the sea with my glasses.  Far away in the south-west I
could see a dark line on the water, which grew even as I looked at it.

“Fair wind!” I cried in a husky voice I did not recognize as my own.

Maud tried to reply, but could not speak.  Her lips were blue with cold,
and she was hollow-eyed—but oh, how bravely her brown eyes looked at me!
How piteously brave!

Again I fell to chafing her hands and to moving her arms up and down and
about until she could thrash them herself.  Then I compelled her to stand
up, and though she would have fallen had I not supported her, I forced
her to walk back and forth the several steps between the thwart and the
stern-sheets, and finally to spring up and down.

“Oh, you brave, brave woman,” I said, when I saw the life coming back
into her face.  “Did you know that you were brave?”

“I never used to be,” she answered.  “I was never brave till I knew you.
It is you who have made me brave.”

“Nor I, until I knew you,” I answered.

She gave me a quick look, and again I caught that dancing, tremulous
light and something more in her eyes.  But it was only for the moment.
Then she smiled.

“It must have been the conditions,” she said; but I knew she was wrong,
and I wondered if she likewise knew.  Then the wind came, fair and fresh,
and the boat was soon labouring through a heavy sea toward the island.
At half-past three in the afternoon we passed the south-western
promontory.  Not only were we hungry, but we were now suffering from
thirst.  Our lips were dry and cracked, nor could we longer moisten them
with our tongues.  Then the wind slowly died down.  By night it was dead
calm and I was toiling once more at the oars—but weakly, most weakly.  At
two in the morning the boat’s bow touched the beach of our own inner cove
and I staggered out to make the painter fast.  Maud could not stand, nor
had I strength to carry her.  I fell in the sand with her, and, when I
had recovered, contented myself with putting my hands under her shoulders
and dragging her up the beach to the hut.

The next day we did no work.  In fact, we slept till three in the
afternoon, or at least I did, for I awoke to find Maud cooking dinner.
Her power of recuperation was wonderful.  There was something tenacious
about that lily-frail body of hers, a clutch on existence which one could
not reconcile with its patent weakness.

“You know I was travelling to Japan for my health,” she said, as we
lingered at the fire after dinner and delighted in the movelessness of
loafing.  “I was not very strong.  I never was.  The doctors recommended
a sea voyage, and I chose the longest.”

“You little knew what you were choosing,” I laughed.

“But I shall be a different women for the experience, as well as a
stronger woman,” she answered; “and, I hope a better woman.  At least I
shall understand a great deal more of life.”

Then, as the short day waned, we fell to discussing Wolf Larsen’s
blindness.  It was inexplicable.  And that it was grave, I instanced his
statement that he intended to stay and die on Endeavour Island.  When he,
strong man that he was, loving life as he did, accepted his death, it was
plain that he was troubled by something more than mere blindness.  There
had been his terrific headaches, and we were agreed that it was some sort
of brain break-down, and that in his attacks he endured pain beyond our
comprehension.

I noticed as we talked over his condition, that Maud’s sympathy went out
to him more and more; yet I could not but love her for it, so sweetly
womanly was it.  Besides, there was no false sentiment about her feeling.
She was agreed that the most rigorous treatment was necessary if we were
to escape, though she recoiled at the suggestion that I might some time
be compelled to take his life to save my own—“our own,” she put it.

In the morning we had breakfast and were at work by daylight.  I found a
light kedge anchor in the fore-hold, where such things were kept; and
with a deal of exertion got it on deck and into the boat.  With a long
running-line coiled down in the stem, I rowed well out into our little
cove and dropped the anchor into the water.  There was no wind, the tide
was high, and the schooner floated.  Casting off the shore-lines, I
kedged her out by main strength (the windlass being broken), till she
rode nearly up and down to the small anchor—too small to hold her in any
breeze.  So I lowered the big starboard anchor, giving plenty of slack;
and by afternoon I was at work on the windlass.

Three days I worked on that windlass.  Least of all things was I a
mechanic, and in that time I accomplished what an ordinary machinist
would have done in as many hours.  I had to learn my tools to begin with,
and every simple mechanical principle which such a man would have at his
finger ends I had likewise to learn.  And at the end of three days I had
a windlass which worked clumsily.  It never gave the satisfaction the old
windlass had given, but it worked and made my work possible.

In half a day I got the two topmasts aboard and the shears rigged and
guyed as before.  And that night I slept on board and on deck beside my
work.  Maud, who refused to stay alone ashore, slept in the forecastle.
Wolf Larsen had sat about, listening to my repairing the windlass and
talking with Maud and me upon indifferent subjects.  No reference was
made on either side to the destruction of the shears; nor did he say
anything further about my leaving his ship alone.  But still I had feared
him, blind and helpless and listening, always listening, and I never let
his strong arms get within reach of me while I worked.

On this night, sleeping under my beloved shears, I was aroused by his
footsteps on the deck.  It was a starlight night, and I could see the
bulk of him dimly as he moved about.  I rolled out of my blankets and
crept noiselessly after him in my stocking feet.  He had armed himself
with a draw-knife from the tool-locker, and with this he prepared to cut
across the throat-halyards I had again rigged to the shears.  He felt the
halyards with his hands and discovered that I had not made them fast.
This would not do for a draw-knife, so he laid hold of the running part,
hove taut, and made fast.  Then he prepared to saw across with the
draw-knife.

“I wouldn’t, if I were you,” I said quietly.

He heard the click of my pistol and laughed.

“Hello, Hump,” he said.  “I knew you were here all the time.  You can’t
fool my ears.”

“That’s a lie, Wolf Larsen,” I said, just as quietly as before.
“However, I am aching for a chance to kill you, so go ahead and cut.”

“You have the chance always,” he sneered.

“Go ahead and cut,” I threatened ominously.

“I’d rather disappoint you,” he laughed, and turned on his heel and went
aft.

“Something must be done, Humphrey,” Maud said, next morning, when I had
told her of the night’s occurrence.  “If he has liberty, he may do
anything.  He may sink the vessel, or set fire to it.  There is no
telling what he may do.  We must make him a prisoner.”

“But how?” I asked, with a helpless shrug.  “I dare not come within reach
of his arms, and he knows that so long as his resistance is passive I
cannot shoot him.”

“There must be some way,” she contended.  “Let me think.”

“There is one way,” I said grimly.

She waited.

I picked up a seal-club.

“It won’t kill him,” I said.  “And before he could recover I’d have him
bound hard and fast.”

She shook her head with a shudder.  “No, not that.  There must be some
less brutal way.  Let us wait.”

But we did not have to wait long, and the problem solved itself.  In the
morning, after several trials, I found the point of balance in the
foremast and attached my hoisting tackle a few feet above it.  Maud held
the turn on the windlass and coiled down while I heaved.  Had the
windlass been in order it would not have been so difficult; as it was, I
was compelled to apply all my weight and strength to every inch of the
heaving.  I had to rest frequently.  In truth, my spells of resting were
longer than those of working.  Maud even contrived, at times when all my
efforts could not budge the windlass, to hold the turn with one hand and
with the other to throw the weight of her slim body to my assistance.

At the end of an hour the single and double blocks came together at the
top of the shears.  I could hoist no more.  And yet the mast was not
swung entirely inboard.  The butt rested against the outside of the port
rail, while the top of the mast overhung the water far beyond the
starboard rail.  My shears were too short.  All my work had been for
nothing.  But I no longer despaired in the old way.  I was acquiring more
confidence in myself and more confidence in the possibilities of
windlasses, shears, and hoisting tackles.  There was a way in which it
could be done, and it remained for me to find that way.

While I was considering the problem, Wolf Larsen came on deck.  We
noticed something strange about him at once.  The indecisiveness, or
feebleness, of his movements was more pronounced.  His walk was actually
tottery as he came down the port side of the cabin.  At the break of the
poop he reeled, raised one hand to his eyes with the familiar brushing
gesture, and fell down the steps—still on his feet—to the main deck,
across which he staggered, falling and flinging out his arms for support.
He regained his balance by the steerage companion-way and stood there
dizzily for a space, when he suddenly crumpled up and collapsed, his legs
bending under him as he sank to the deck.

“One of his attacks,” I whispered to Maud.

She nodded her head; and I could see sympathy warm in her eyes.

We went up to him, but he seemed unconscious, breathing spasmodically.
She took charge of him, lifting his head to keep the blood out of it and
despatching me to the cabin for a pillow.  I also brought blankets, and
we made him comfortable.  I took his pulse.  It beat steadily and strong,
and was quite normal.  This puzzled me.  I became suspicious.

“What if he should be feigning this?” I asked, still holding his wrist.

Maud shook her head, and there was reproof in her eyes.  But just then
the wrist I held leaped from my hand, and the hand clasped like a steel
trap about my wrist.  I cried aloud in awful fear, a wild inarticulate
cry; and I caught one glimpse of his face, malignant and triumphant, as
his other hand compassed my body and I was drawn down to him in a
terrible grip.

My wrist was released, but his other arm, passed around my back, held
both my arms so that I could not move.  His free hand went to my throat,
and in that moment I knew the bitterest foretaste of death earned by
one’s own idiocy.  Why had I trusted myself within reach of those
terrible arms?  I could feel other hands at my throat.  They were Maud’s
hands, striving vainly to tear loose the hand that was throttling me.
She gave it up, and I heard her scream in a way that cut me to the soul,
for it was a woman’s scream of fear and heart-breaking despair.  I had
heard it before, during the sinking of the _Martinez_.

My face was against his chest and I could not see, but I heard Maud turn
and run swiftly away along the deck.  Everything was happening quickly.
I had not yet had a glimmering of unconsciousness, and it seemed that an
interminable period of time was lapsing before I heard her feet flying
back.  And just then I felt the whole man sink under me.  The breath was
leaving his lungs and his chest was collapsing under my weight.  Whether
it was merely the expelled breath, or his consciousness of his growing
impotence, I know not, but his throat vibrated with a deep groan.  The
hand at my throat relaxed.  I breathed.  It fluttered and tightened
again.  But even his tremendous will could not overcome the dissolution
that assailed it.  That will of his was breaking down.  He was fainting.

Maud’s footsteps were very near as his hand fluttered for the last time
and my throat was released.  I rolled off and over to the deck on my
back, gasping and blinking in the sunshine.  Maud was pale but
composed,—my eyes had gone instantly to her face,—and she was looking at
me with mingled alarm and relief.  A heavy seal-club in her hand caught
my eyes, and at that moment she followed my gaze down to it.  The club
dropped from her hand as though it had suddenly stung her, and at the
same moment my heart surged with a great joy.  Truly she was my woman, my
mate-woman, fighting with me and for me as the mate of a caveman would
have fought, all the primitive in her aroused, forgetful of her culture,
hard under the softening civilization of the only life she had ever
known.

“Dear woman!” I cried, scrambling to my feet.

The next moment she was in my arms, weeping convulsively on my shoulder
while I clasped her close.  I looked down at the brown glory of her hair,
glinting gems in the sunshine far more precious to me than those in the
treasure-chests of kings.  And I bent my head and kissed her hair softly,
so softly that she did not know.

Then sober thought came to me.  After all, she was only a woman, crying
her relief, now that the danger was past, in the arms of her protector or
of the one who had been endangered.  Had I been father or brother, the
situation would have been in nowise different.  Besides, time and place
were not meet, and I wished to earn a better right to declare my love.
So once again I softly kissed her hair as I felt her receding from my
clasp.

“It was a real attack this time,” I said: “another shock like the one
that made him blind.  He feigned at first, and in doing so brought it
on.”

Maud was already rearranging his pillow.

“No,” I said, “not yet.  Now that I have him helpless, helpless he shall
remain.  From this day we live in the cabin.  Wolf Larsen shall live in
the steerage.”

I caught him under the shoulders and dragged him to the companion-way.
At my direction Maud fetched a rope.  Placing this under his shoulders, I
balanced him across the threshold and lowered him down the steps to the
floor.  I could not lift him directly into a bunk, but with Maud’s help I
lifted first his shoulders and head, then his body, balanced him across
the edge, and rolled him into a lower bunk.

But this was not to be all.  I recollected the handcuffs in his
state-room, which he preferred to use on sailors instead of the ancient
and clumsy ship irons.  So, when we left him, he lay handcuffed hand and
foot.  For the first time in many days I breathed freely.  I felt
strangely light as I came on deck, as though a weight had been lifted off
my shoulders.  I felt, also, that Maud and I had drawn more closely
together.  And I wondered if she, too, felt it, as we walked along the
deck side by side to where the stalled foremast hung in the shears.




CHAPTER XXXVII


At once we moved aboard the _Ghost_, occupying our old state-rooms and
cooking in the galley.  The imprisonment of Wolf Larsen had happened most
opportunely, for what must have been the Indian summer of this high
latitude was gone and drizzling stormy weather had set in.  We were very
comfortable, and the inadequate shears, with the foremast suspended from
them, gave a business-like air to the schooner and a promise of
departure.

And now that we had Wolf Larsen in irons, how little did we need it!
Like his first attack, his second had been accompanied by serious
disablement.  Maud made the discovery in the afternoon while trying to
give him nourishment.  He had shown signs of consciousness, and she had
spoken to him, eliciting no response.  He was lying on his left side at
the time, and in evident pain.  With a restless movement he rolled his
head around, clearing his left ear from the pillow against which it had
been pressed.  At once he heard and answered her, and at once she came to
me.

Pressing the pillow against his left ear, I asked him if he heard me, but
he gave no sign.  Removing the pillow and, repeating the question he
answered promptly that he did.

“Do you know you are deaf in the right ear?” I asked.

“Yes,” he answered in a low, strong voice, “and worse than that.  My
whole right side is affected.  It seems asleep.  I cannot move arm or
leg.”

“Feigning again?” I demanded angrily.

He shook his head, his stern mouth shaping the strangest, twisted smile.
It was indeed a twisted smile, for it was on the left side only, the
facial muscles of the right side moving not at all.

“That was the last play of the Wolf,” he said.  “I am paralysed.  I shall
never walk again.  Oh, only on the other side,” he added, as though
divining the suspicious glance I flung at his left leg, the knee of which
had just then drawn up, and elevated the blankets.

“It’s unfortunate,” he continued.  “I’d liked to have done for you first,
Hump.  And I thought I had that much left in me.”

“But why?” I asked; partly in horror, partly out of curiosity.

Again his stern mouth framed the twisted smile, as he said:

“Oh, just to be alive, to be living and doing, to be the biggest bit of
the ferment to the end, to eat you.  But to die this way.”

He shrugged his shoulders, or attempted to shrug them, rather, for the
left shoulder alone moved.  Like the smile, the shrug was twisted.

“But how can you account for it?” I asked.  “Where is the seat of your
trouble?”

“The brain,” he said at once.  “It was those cursed headaches brought it
on.”

“Symptoms,” I said.

He nodded his head.  “There is no accounting for it.  I was never sick in
my life.  Something’s gone wrong with my brain.  A cancer, a tumour, or
something of that nature,—a thing that devours and destroys.  It’s
attacking my nerve-centres, eating them up, bit by bit, cell by cell—from
the pain.”

“The motor-centres, too,” I suggested.

“So it would seem; and the curse of it is that I must lie here,
conscious, mentally unimpaired, knowing that the lines are going down,
breaking bit by bit communication with the world.  I cannot see, hearing
and feeling are leaving me, at this rate I shall soon cease to speak; yet
all the time I shall be here, alive, active, and powerless.”

“When you say _you_ are here, I’d suggest the likelihood of the soul,” I
said.

“Bosh!” was his retort.  “It simply means that in the attack on my brain
the higher psychical centres are untouched.  I can remember, I can think
and reason.  When that goes, I go.  I am not.  The soul?”

He broke out in mocking laughter, then turned his left ear to the pillow
as a sign that he wished no further conversation.

Maud and I went about our work oppressed by the fearful fate which had
overtaken him,—how fearful we were yet fully to realize.  There was the
awfulness of retribution about it.  Our thoughts were deep and solemn,
and we spoke to each other scarcely above whispers.

“You might remove the handcuffs,” he said that night, as we stood in
consultation over him.  “It’s dead safe.  I’m a paralytic now.  The next
thing to watch out for is bed sores.”

He smiled his twisted smile, and Maud, her eyes wide with horror, was
compelled to turn away her head.

“Do you know that your smile is crooked?” I asked him; for I knew that
she must attend him, and I wished to save her as much as possible.

“Then I shall smile no more,” he said calmly.  “I thought something was
wrong.  My right cheek has been numb all day.  Yes, and I’ve had warnings
of this for the last three days; by spells, my right side seemed going to
sleep, sometimes arm or hand, sometimes leg or foot.”

“So my smile is crooked?” he queried a short while after.  “Well,
consider henceforth that I smile internally, with my soul, if you please,
my soul.  Consider that I am smiling now.”

And for the space of several minutes he lay there, quiet, indulging his
grotesque fancy.

The man of him was not changed.  It was the old, indomitable, terrible
Wolf Larsen, imprisoned somewhere within that flesh which had once been
so invincible and splendid.  Now it bound him with insentient fetters,
walling his soul in darkness and silence, blocking it from the world
which to him had been a riot of action.  No more would he conjugate the
verb “to do in every mood and tense.”  “To be” was all that remained to
him—to be, as he had defined death, without movement; to will, but not to
execute; to think and reason and in the spirit of him to be as alive as
ever, but in the flesh to be dead, quite dead.

And yet, though I even removed the handcuffs, we could not adjust
ourselves to his condition.  Our minds revolted.  To us he was full of
potentiality.  We knew not what to expect of him next, what fearful
thing, rising above the flesh, he might break out and do.  Our experience
warranted this state of mind, and we went about our work with anxiety
always upon us.

I had solved the problem which had arisen through the shortness of the
shears.  By means of the watch-tackle (I had made a new one), I heaved
the butt of the foremast across the rail and then lowered it to the deck.
Next, by means of the shears, I hoisted the main boom on board.  Its
forty feet of length would supply the height necessary properly to swing
the mast.  By means of a secondary tackle I had attached to the shears, I
swung the boom to a nearly perpendicular position, then lowered the butt
to the deck, where, to prevent slipping, I spiked great cleats around it.
The single block of my original shears-tackle I had attached to the end
of the boom.  Thus, by carrying this tackle to the windlass, I could
raise and lower the end of the boom at will, the butt always remaining
stationary, and, by means of guys, I could swing the boom from side to
side.  To the end of the boom I had likewise rigged a hoisting tackle;
and when the whole arrangement was completed I could not but be startled
by the power and latitude it gave me.

Of course, two days’ work was required for the accomplishment of this
part of my task, and it was not till the morning of the third day that I
swung the foremast from the deck and proceeded to square its butt to fit
the step.  Here I was especially awkward.  I sawed and chopped and
chiselled the weathered wood till it had the appearance of having been
gnawed by some gigantic mouse.  But it fitted.

“It will work, I know it will work,” I cried.

“Do you know Dr. Jordan’s final test of truth?” Maud asked.

I shook my head and paused in the act of dislodging the shavings which
had drifted down my neck.

“Can we make it work?  Can we trust our lives to it? is the test.”

“He is a favourite of yours,” I said.

“When I dismantled my old Pantheon and cast out Napoleon and Cæsar and
their fellows, I straightway erected a new Pantheon,” she answered
gravely, “and the first I installed was Dr. Jordan.”

“A modern hero.”

“And a greater because modern,” she added.  “How can the Old World heroes
compare with ours?”

I shook my head.  We were too much alike in many things for argument.
Our points of view and outlook on life at least were very alike.

“For a pair of critics we agree famously,” I laughed.

“And as shipwright and able assistant,” she laughed back.

But there was little time for laughter in those days, what of our heavy
work and of the awfulness of Wolf Larsen’s living death.

He had received another stroke.  He had lost his voice, or he was losing
it.  He had only intermittent use of it.  As he phrased it, the wires
were like the stock market, now up, now down.  Occasionally the wires
were up and he spoke as well as ever, though slowly and heavily.  Then
speech would suddenly desert him, in the middle of a sentence perhaps,
and for hours, sometimes, we would wait for the connection to be
re-established.  He complained of great pain in his head, and it was
during this period that he arranged a system of communication against the
time when speech should leave him altogether—one pressure of the hand for
“yes,” two for “no.”  It was well that it was arranged, for by evening
his voice had gone from him.  By hand pressures, after that, he answered
our questions, and when he wished to speak he scrawled his thoughts with
his left hand, quite legibly, on a sheet of paper.

The fierce winter had now descended upon us.  Gale followed gale, with
snow and sleet and rain.  The seals had started on their great southern
migration, and the rookery was practically deserted.  I worked
feverishly.  In spite of the bad weather, and of the wind which
especially hindered me, I was on deck from daylight till dark and making
substantial progress.

I profited by my lesson learned through raising the shears and then
climbing them to attach the guys.  To the top of the foremast, which was
just lifted conveniently from the deck, I attached the rigging, stays and
throat and peak halyards.  As usual, I had underrated the amount of work
involved in this portion of the task, and two long days were necessary to
complete it.  And there was so much yet to be done—the sails, for
instance, which practically had to be made over.

While I toiled at rigging the foremast, Maud sewed on canvas, ready
always to drop everything and come to my assistance when more hands than
two were required.  The canvas was heavy and hard, and she sewed with the
regular sailor’s palm and three-cornered sail-needle.  Her hands were
soon sadly blistered, but she struggled bravely on, and in addition doing
the cooking and taking care of the sick man.

“A fig for superstition,” I said on Friday morning.  “That mast goes in
to-day.”

Everything was ready for the attempt.  Carrying the boom-tackle to the
windlass, I hoisted the mast nearly clear of the deck.  Making this
tackle fast, I took to the windlass the shears-tackle (which was
connected with the end of the boom), and with a few turns had the mast
perpendicular and clear.

Maud clapped her hands the instant she was relieved from holding the
turn, crying:

“It works!  It works!  We’ll trust our lives to it!”

Then she assumed a rueful expression.

“It’s not over the hole,” she add.  “Will you have to begin all over?”

I smiled in superior fashion, and, slacking off on one of the boom-guys
and taking in on the other, swung the mast perfectly in the centre of the
deck.  Still it was not over the hole.  Again the rueful expression came
on her face, and again I smiled in a superior way.  Slacking away on the
boom-tackle and hoisting an equivalent amount on the shears-tackle, I
brought the butt of the mast into position directly over the hole in the
deck.  Then I gave Maud careful instructions for lowering away and went
into the hold to the step on the schooner’s bottom.

I called to her, and the mast moved easily and accurately.  Straight
toward the square hole of the step the square butt descended; but as it
descended it slowly twisted so that square would not fit into square.
But I had not even a moment’s indecision.  Calling to Maud to cease
lowering, I went on deck and made the watch-tackle fast to the mast with
a rolling hitch.  I left Maud to pull on it while I went below.  By the
light of the lantern I saw the butt twist slowly around till its sides
coincided with the sides of the step.  Maud made fast and returned to the
windlass.  Slowly the butt descended the several intervening inches, at
the same time slightly twisting again.  Again Maud rectified the twist
with the watch-tackle, and again she lowered away from the windlass.
Square fitted into square.  The mast was stepped.

I raised a shout, and she ran down to see.  In the yellow lantern light
we peered at what we had accomplished.  We looked at each other, and our
hands felt their way and clasped.  The eyes of both of us, I think, were
moist with the joy of success.

“It was done so easily after all,” I remarked.  “All the work was in the
preparation.”

“And all the wonder in the completion,” Maud added.  “I can scarcely
bring myself to realize that that great mast is really up and in; that
you have lifted it from the water, swung it through the air, and
deposited it here where it belongs.  It is a Titan’s task.”

“And they made themselves many inventions,” I began merrily, then paused
to sniff the air.

I looked hastily at the lantern.  It was not smoking.  Again I sniffed.

“Something is burning,” Maud said, with sudden conviction.

We sprang together for the ladder, but I raced past her to the deck.  A
dense volume of smoke was pouring out of the steerage companion-way.

“The Wolf is not yet dead,” I muttered to myself as I sprang down through
the smoke.

It was so thick in the confined space that I was compelled to feel my
way; and so potent was the spell of Wolf Larsen on my imagination, I was
quite prepared for the helpless giant to grip my neck in a strangle hold.
I hesitated, the desire to race back and up the steps to the deck almost
overpowering me.  Then I recollected Maud.  The vision of her, as I had
last seen her, in the lantern light of the schooner’s hold, her brown
eyes warm and moist with joy, flashed before me, and I knew that I could
not go back.

I was choking and suffocating by the time I reached Wolf Larsen’s bunk.
I reached my hand and felt for his.  He was lying motionless, but moved
slightly at the touch of my hand.  I felt over and under his blankets.
There was no warmth, no sign of fire.  Yet that smoke which blinded me
and made me cough and gasp must have a source.  I lost my head
temporarily and dashed frantically about the steerage.  A collision with
the table partially knocked the wind from my body and brought me to
myself.  I reasoned that a helpless man could start a fire only near to
where he lay.

I returned to Wolf Larsen’s bunk.  There I encountered Maud.  How long
she had been there in that suffocating atmosphere I could not guess.

“Go up on deck!” I commanded peremptorily.

“But, Humphrey—” she began to protest in a queer, husky voice.

“Please! please!” I shouted at her harshly.

She drew away obediently, and then I thought, What if she cannot find the
steps?  I started after her, to stop at the foot of the companion-way.
Perhaps she had gone up.  As I stood there, hesitant, I heard her cry
softly:

“Oh, Humphrey, I am lost.”

I found her fumbling at the wall of the after bulkhead, and, half leading
her, half carrying her, I took her up the companion-way.  The pure air
was like nectar.  Maud was only faint and dizzy, and I left her lying on
the deck when I took my second plunge below.

The source of the smoke must be very close to Wolf Larsen—my mind was
made up to this, and I went straight to his bunk.  As I felt about among
his blankets, something hot fell on the back of my hand.  It burned me,
and I jerked my hand away.  Then I understood.  Through the cracks in the
bottom of the upper bunk he had set fire to the mattress.  He still
retained sufficient use of his left arm to do this.  The damp straw of
the mattress, fired from beneath and denied air, had been smouldering all
the while.

As I dragged the mattress out of the bunk it seemed to disintegrate in
mid-air, at the same time bursting into flames.  I beat out the burning
remnants of straw in the bunk, then made a dash for the deck for fresh
air.

Several buckets of water sufficed to put out the burning mattress in the
middle of the steerage floor; and ten minutes later, when the smoke had
fairly cleared, I allowed Maud to come below.  Wolf Larsen was
unconscious, but it was a matter of minutes for the fresh air to restore
him.  We were working over him, however, when he signed for paper and
pencil.

“Pray do not interrupt me,” he wrote.  “I am smiling.”

“I am still a bit of the ferment, you see,” he wrote a little later.

“I am glad you are as small a bit as you are,” I said.

“Thank you,” he wrote.  “But just think of how much smaller I shall be
before I die.”

“And yet I am all here, Hump,” he wrote with a final flourish.  “I can
think more clearly than ever in my life before.  Nothing to disturb me.
Concentration is perfect.  I am all here and more than here.”

It was like a message from the night of the grave; for this man’s body
had become his mausoleum.  And there, in so strange sepulchre, his spirit
fluttered and lived.  It would flutter and live till the last line of
communication was broken, and after that who was to say how much longer
it might continue to flutter and live?




CHAPTER XXXVIII


“I think my left side is going,” Wolf Larsen wrote, the morning after his
attempt to fire the ship.  “The numbness is growing.  I can hardly move
my hand.  You will have to speak louder.  The last lines are going down.”

“Are you in pain?” I asked.

I was compelled to repeat my question loudly before he answered:

“Not all the time.”

The left hand stumbled slowly and painfully across the paper, and it was
with extreme difficulty that we deciphered the scrawl.  It was like a
“spirit message,” such as are delivered at séances of spiritualists for a
dollar admission.

“But I am still here, all here,” the hand scrawled more slowly and
painfully than ever.

The pencil dropped, and we had to replace it in the hand.

“When there is no pain I have perfect peace and quiet.  I have never
thought so clearly.  I can ponder life and death like a Hindoo sage.”

“And immortality?” Maud queried loudly in the ear.

Three times the hand essayed to write but fumbled hopelessly.  The pencil
fell.  In vain we tried to replace it.  The fingers could not close on
it.  Then Maud pressed and held the fingers about the pencil with her own
hand and the hand wrote, in large letters, and so slowly that the minutes
ticked off to each letter:

“B-O-S-H.”

It was Wolf Larsen’s last word, “bosh,” sceptical and invincible to the
end.  The arm and hand relaxed.  The trunk of the body moved slightly.
Then there was no movement.  Maud released the hand.  The fingers spread
slightly, falling apart of their own weight, and the pencil rolled away.

“Do you still hear?” I shouted, holding the fingers and waiting for the
single pressure which would signify “Yes.”  There was no response.  The
hand was dead.

“I noticed the lips slightly move,” Maud said.

I repeated the question.  The lips moved.  She placed the tips of her
fingers on them.  Again I repeated the question.  “Yes,” Maud announced.
We looked at each other expectantly.

“What good is it?” I asked.  “What can we say now?”

“Oh, ask him—”

She hesitated.

“Ask him something that requires no for an answer,” I suggested.  “Then
we will know for certainty.”

“Are you hungry?” she cried.

The lips moved under her fingers, and she answered, “Yes.”

“Will you have some beef?” was her next query.

“No,” she announced.

“Beef-tea?”

“Yes, he will have some beef-tea,” she said, quietly, looking up at me.
“Until his hearing goes we shall be able to communicate with him.  And
after that—”

She looked at me queerly.  I saw her lips trembling and the tears
swimming up in her eyes.  She swayed toward me and I caught her in my
arms.

“Oh, Humphrey,” she sobbed, “when will it all end?  I am so tired, so
tired.”

She buried her head on my shoulder, her frail form shaken with a storm of
weeping.  She was like a feather in my arms, so slender, so ethereal.
“She has broken down at last,” I thought.  “What can I do without her
help?”

But I soothed and comforted her, till she pulled herself bravely together
and recuperated mentally as quickly as she was wont to do physically.

“I ought to be ashamed of myself,” she said.  Then added, with the
whimsical smile I adored, “but I am only one, small woman.”

That phrase, the “one small woman,” startled me like an electric shock.
It was my own phrase, my pet, secret phrase, my love phrase for her.

“Where did you get that phrase?” I demanded, with an abruptness that in
turn startled her.

“What phrase?” she asked.

“One small woman.”

“Is it yours?” she asked.

“Yes,” I answered.  “Mine.  I made it.”

“Then you must have talked in your sleep,” she smiled.

The dancing, tremulous light was in her eyes.  Mine, I knew, were
speaking beyond the will of my speech.  I leaned toward her.  Without
volition I leaned toward her, as a tree is swayed by the wind.  Ah, we
were very close together in that moment.  But she shook her head, as one
might shake off sleep or a dream, saying:

“I have known it all my life.  It was my father’s name for my mother.”

“It is my phrase too,” I said stubbornly.

“For your mother?”

“No,” I answered, and she questioned no further, though I could have
sworn her eyes retained for some time a mocking, teasing expression.

With the foremast in, the work now went on apace.  Almost before I knew
it, and without one serious hitch, I had the mainmast stepped.  A
derrick-boom, rigged to the foremast, had accomplished this; and several
days more found all stays and shrouds in place, and everything set up
taut.  Topsails would be a nuisance and a danger for a crew of two, so I
heaved the topmasts on deck and lashed them fast.

Several more days were consumed in finishing the sails and putting them
on.  There were only three—the jib, foresail, and mainsail; and, patched,
shortened, and distorted, they were a ridiculously ill-fitting suit for
so trim a craft as the _Ghost_.

“But they’ll work!” Maud cried jubilantly.  “We’ll make them work, and
trust our lives to them!”

Certainly, among my many new trades, I shone least as a sail-maker.  I
could sail them better than make them, and I had no doubt of my power to
bring the schooner to some northern port of Japan.  In fact, I had
crammed navigation from text-books aboard; and besides, there was Wolf
Larsen’s star-scale, so simple a device that a child could work it.

As for its inventor, beyond an increasing deafness and the movement of
the lips growing fainter and fainter, there had been little change in his
condition for a week.  But on the day we finished bending the schooner’s
sails, he heard his last, and the last movement of his lips died away—but
not before I had asked him, “Are you all there?” and the lips had
answered, “Yes.”

The last line was down.  Somewhere within that tomb of the flesh still
dwelt the soul of the man.  Walled by the living clay, that fierce
intelligence we had known burned on; but it burned on in silence and
darkness.  And it was disembodied.  To that intelligence there could be
no objective knowledge of a body.  It knew no body.  The very world was
not.  It knew only itself and the vastness and profundity of the quiet
and the dark.




CHAPTER XXXIX


The day came for our departure.  There was no longer anything to detain
us on Endeavour Island.  The _Ghost’s_ stumpy masts were in place, her
crazy sails bent.  All my handiwork was strong, none of it beautiful; but
I knew that it would work, and I felt myself a man of power as I looked
at it.

“I did it!  I did it!  With my own hands I did it!” I wanted to cry
aloud.

But Maud and I had a way of voicing each other’s thoughts, and she said,
as we prepared to hoist the mainsail:

“To think, Humphrey, you did it all with your own hands?”

“But there were two other hands,” I answered.  “Two small hands, and
don’t say that was a phrase, also, of your father.”

She laughed and shook her head, and held her hands up for inspection.

“I can never get them clean again,” she wailed, “nor soften the
weather-beat.”

“Then dirt and weather-beat shall be your guerdon of honour,” I said,
holding them in mine; and, spite of my resolutions, I would have kissed
the two dear hands had she not swiftly withdrawn them.

Our comradeship was becoming tremulous, I had mastered my love long and
well, but now it was mastering me.  Wilfully had it disobeyed and won my
eyes to speech, and now it was winning my tongue—ay, and my lips, for
they were mad this moment to kiss the two small hands which had toiled so
faithfully and hard.  And I, too, was mad.  There was a cry in my being
like bugles calling me to her.  And there was a wind blowing upon me
which I could not resist, swaying the very body of me till I leaned
toward her, all unconscious that I leaned.  And she knew it.  She could
not but know it as she swiftly drew away her hands, and yet, could not
forbear one quick searching look before she turned away her eyes.

By means of deck-tackles I had arranged to carry the halyards forward to
the windlass; and now I hoisted the mainsail, peak and throat, at the
same time.  It was a clumsy way, but it did not take long, and soon the
foresail as well was up and fluttering.

“We can never get that anchor up in this narrow place, once it has left
the bottom,” I said.  “We should be on the rocks first.”

“What can you do?” she asked.

“Slip it,” was my answer.  “And when I do, you must do your first work on
the windlass.  I shall have to run at once to the wheel, and at the same
time you must be hoisting the jib.”

This manœuvre of getting under way I had studied and worked out a score
of times; and, with the jib-halyard to the windlass, I knew Maud was
capable of hoisting that most necessary sail.  A brisk wind was blowing
into the cove, and though the water was calm, rapid work was required to
get us safely out.

When I knocked the shackle-bolt loose, the chain roared out through the
hawse-hole and into the sea.  I raced aft, putting the wheel up.  The
_Ghost_ seemed to start into life as she heeled to the first fill of her
sails.  The jib was rising.  As it filled, the _Ghost’s_ bow swung off
and I had to put the wheel down a few spokes and steady her.

I had devised an automatic jib-sheet which passed the jib across of
itself, so there was no need for Maud to attend to that; but she was
still hoisting the jib when I put the wheel hard down.  It was a moment
of anxiety, for the _Ghost_ was rushing directly upon the beach, a
stone’s throw distant.  But she swung obediently on her heel into the
wind.  There was a great fluttering and flapping of canvas and
reef-points, most welcome to my ears, then she filled away on the other
tack.

Maud had finished her task and come aft, where she stood beside me, a
small cap perched on her wind-blown hair, her cheeks flushed from
exertion, her eyes wide and bright with the excitement, her nostrils
quivering to the rush and bite of the fresh salt air.  Her brown eyes
were like a startled deer’s.  There was a wild, keen look in them I had
never seen before, and her lips parted and her breath suspended as the
_Ghost_, charging upon the wall of rock at the entrance to the inner
cove, swept into the wind and filled away into safe water.

My first mate’s berth on the sealing grounds stood me in good stead, and
I cleared the inner cove and laid a long tack along the shore of the
outer cove.  Once again about, and the _Ghost_ headed out to open sea.
She had now caught the bosom-breathing of the ocean, and was herself
a-breath with the rhythm of it as she smoothly mounted and slipped down
each broad-backed wave.  The day had been dull and overcast, but the sun
now burst through the clouds, a welcome omen, and shone upon the curving
beach where together we had dared the lords of the harem and slain the
holluschickie.  All Endeavour Island brightened under the sun.  Even the
grim south-western promontory showed less grim, and here and there, where
the sea-spray wet its surface, high lights flashed and dazzled in the
sun.

“I shall always think of it with pride,” I said to Maud.

She threw her head back in a queenly way but said, “Dear, dear Endeavour
Island!  I shall always love it.”

“And I,” I said quickly.

It seemed our eyes must meet in a great understanding, and yet, loath,
they struggled away and did not meet.

There was a silence I might almost call awkward, till I broke it, saying:

“See those black clouds to windward.  You remember, I told you last night
the barometer was falling.”

“And the sun is gone,” she said, her eyes still fixed upon our island,
where we had proved our mastery over matter and attained to the truest
comradeship that may fall to man and woman.

“And it’s slack off the sheets for Japan!” I cried gaily.  “A fair wind
and a flowing sheet, you know, or however it goes.”

Lashing the wheel I ran forward, eased the fore and mainsheets, took in
on the boom-tackles and trimmed everything for the quartering breeze
which was ours.  It was a fresh breeze, very fresh, but I resolved to run
as long as I dared.  Unfortunately, when running free, it is impossible
to lash the wheel, so I faced an all-night watch.  Maud insisted on
relieving me, but proved that she had not the strength to steer in a
heavy sea, even if she could have gained the wisdom on such short notice.
She appeared quite heart-broken over the discovery, but recovered her
spirits by coiling down tackles and halyards and all stray ropes.  Then
there were meals to be cooked in the galley, beds to make, Wolf Larsen to
be attended upon, and she finished the day with a grand house-cleaning
attack upon the cabin and steerage.

All night I steered, without relief, the wind slowly and steadily
increasing and the sea rising.  At five in the morning Maud brought me
hot coffee and biscuits she had baked, and at seven a substantial and
piping hot breakfast put new lift into me.

Throughout the day, and as slowly and steadily as ever, the wind
increased.  It impressed one with its sullen determination to blow, and
blow harder, and keep on blowing.  And still the _Ghost_ foamed along,
racing off the miles till I was certain she was making at least eleven
knots.  It was too good to lose, but by nightfall I was exhausted.
Though in splendid physical trim, a thirty-six-hour trick at the wheel
was the limit of my endurance.  Besides, Maud begged me to heave to, and
I knew, if the wind and sea increased at the same rate during the night,
that it would soon be impossible to heave to.  So, as twilight deepened,
gladly and at the same time reluctantly, I brought the _Ghost_ up on the
wind.

But I had not reckoned upon the colossal task the reefing of three sails
meant for one man.  While running away from the wind I had not
appreciated its force, but when we ceased to run I learned to my sorrow,
and well-nigh to my despair, how fiercely it was really blowing.  The
wind balked my every effort, ripping the canvas out of my hands and in an
instant undoing what I had gained by ten minutes of severest struggle.
At eight o’clock I had succeeded only in putting the second reef into the
foresail.  At eleven o’clock I was no farther along.  Blood dripped from
every finger-end, while the nails were broken to the quick.  From pain
and sheer exhaustion I wept in the darkness, secretly, so that Maud
should not know.

Then, in desperation, I abandoned the attempt to reef the mainsail and
resolved to try the experiment of heaving to under the close-reefed
foresail.  Three hours more were required to gasket the mainsail and jib,
and at two in the morning, nearly dead, the life almost buffeted and
worked out of me, I had barely sufficient consciousness to know the
experiment was a success.  The close-reefed foresail worked.  The _Ghost_
clung on close to the wind and betrayed no inclination to fall off
broadside to the trough.

I was famished, but Maud tried vainly to get me to eat.  I dozed with my
mouth full of food.  I would fall asleep in the act of carrying food to
my mouth and waken in torment to find the act yet uncompleted.  So
sleepily helpless was I that she was compelled to hold me in my chair to
prevent my being flung to the floor by the violent pitching of the
schooner.

Of the passage from the galley to the cabin I knew nothing.  It was a
sleep-walker Maud guided and supported.  In fact, I was aware of nothing
till I awoke, how long after I could not imagine, in my bunk with my
boots off.  It was dark.  I was stiff and lame, and cried out with pain
when the bed-clothes touched my poor finger-ends.

Morning had evidently not come, so I closed my eyes and went to sleep
again.  I did not know it, but I had slept the clock around and it was
night again.

Once more I woke, troubled because I could sleep no better.  I struck a
match and looked at my watch.  It marked midnight.  And I had not left
the deck until three!  I should have been puzzled had I not guessed the
solution.  No wonder I was sleeping brokenly.  I had slept twenty-one
hours.  I listened for a while to the behaviour of the _Ghost_, to the
pounding of the seas and the muffled roar of the wind on deck, and then
turned over on my side and slept peacefully until morning.

When I arose at seven I saw no sign of Maud and concluded she was in the
galley preparing breakfast.  On deck I found the _Ghost_ doing splendidly
under her patch of canvas.  But in the galley, though a fire was burning
and water boiling, I found no Maud.

I discovered her in the steerage, by Wolf Larsen’s bunk.  I looked at
him, the man who had been hurled down from the topmost pitch of life to
be buried alive and be worse than dead.  There seemed a relaxation of his
expressionless face which was new.  Maud looked at me and I understood.

“His life flickered out in the storm,” I said.

“But he still lives,” she answered, infinite faith in her voice.

“He had too great strength.”

“Yes,” she said, “but now it no longer shackles him.  He is a free
spirit.”

“He is a free spirit surely,” I answered; and, taking her hand, I led her
on deck.

The storm broke that night, which is to say that it diminished as slowly
as it had arisen.  After breakfast next morning, when I had hoisted Wolf
Larsen’s body on deck ready for burial, it was still blowing heavily and
a large sea was running.  The deck was continually awash with the sea
which came inboard over the rail and through the scuppers.  The wind
smote the schooner with a sudden gust, and she heeled over till her lee
rail was buried, the roar in her rigging rising in pitch to a shriek.  We
stood in the water to our knees as I bared my head.

“I remember only one part of the service,” I said, “and that is, ‘And the
body shall be cast into the sea.’”

Maud looked at me, surprised and shocked; but the spirit of something I
had seen before was strong upon me, impelling me to give service to Wolf
Larsen as Wolf Larsen had once given service to another man.  I lifted
the end of the hatch cover and the canvas-shrouded body slipped feet
first into the sea.  The weight of iron dragged it down.  It was gone.

“Good-bye, Lucifer, proud spirit,” Maud whispered, so low that it was
drowned by the shouting of the wind; but I saw the movement of her lips
and knew.

As we clung to the lee rail and worked our way aft, I happened to glance
to leeward.  The _Ghost_, at the moment, was uptossed on a sea, and I
caught a clear view of a small steamship two or three miles away, rolling
and pitching, head on to the sea, as it steamed toward us.  It was
painted black, and from the talk of the hunters of their poaching
exploits I recognized it as a United States revenue cutter.  I pointed it
out to Maud and hurriedly led her aft to the safety of the poop.

I started to rush below to the flag-locker, then remembered that in
rigging the _Ghost_.  I had forgotten to make provision for a
flag-halyard.

“We need no distress signal,” Maud said.  “They have only to see us.”

“We are saved,” I said, soberly and solemnly.  And then, in an exuberance
of joy, “I hardly know whether to be glad or not.”

I looked at her.  Our eyes were not loath to meet.  We leaned toward each
other, and before I knew it my arms were about her.

“Need I?” I asked.

And she answered, “There is no need, though the telling of it would be
sweet, so sweet.”

Her lips met the press of mine, and, by what strange trick of the
imagination I know not, the scene in the cabin of the _Ghost_ flashed
upon me, when she had pressed her fingers lightly on my lips and said,
“Hush, hush.”

“My woman, my one small woman,” I said, my free hand petting her shoulder
in the way all lovers know though never learn in school.

“My man,” she said, looking at me for an instant with tremulous lids
which fluttered down and veiled her eyes as she snuggled her head against
my breast with a happy little sigh.

I looked toward the cutter.  It was very close.  A boat was being
lowered.

“One kiss, dear love,” I whispered.  “One kiss more before they come.”

“And rescue us from ourselves,” she completed, with a most adorable
smile, whimsical as I had never seen it, for it was whimsical with love.
